I. 1 The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw
concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham,
Ahaz, (and) Hezekiah, kings of Judah.

2 Hear, Ο heavens, and give ear, Ο earth: for the LORD hath
spoken, I have nourished and brought up sons, and they have
rebelled against me.

3 The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his ’s crib:
Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider.

4 Ah, sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of
evildoers, sons that deal corruptly; they have forsaken the LORD,
they have scorned the Holy One of Israel, they are gone away
backward.

5 Why will ye be still stricken, (that) ye revolt more and more?
the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.

6 From the sole of the foot even unto the head (there is) no
soundness in it; wound, and weal, and putrefying sore: they
have not been pressed out, neither bound up, neither is it
mollified with oil.

7 Your country is a desolation, your cities are burned with
ﬁre; your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is a
desolation, like an overthrow of strangers.

8 And the daughter of Zion is left as a booth in a vineyard, as
a ’tent in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city.

9 Except the LORD of Hosts had left us a very small remnant,
we should have been as Sodom, we should have been like unto
Gomorrah.

10 Hear the word of the LORD, ye rulers of Sodom; give ye
ear unto the law of our God, people of Gomorrah.

11 To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto
me? saith the LORD: I am sated with the burnt offerings of rams,
and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of
bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats.

12 When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this
at your hand, to trample my courts?

13 Bring no more vain (meal-) offerings; incense is an abomination
unto me; new moons and sabbaths, callings of assemblies;
I cannot away with iniquity and the solemn meetings.

14 Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth:
they are a cumbrance unto me: I am weary of bearing.

15 And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes
from you; yea, when ye multiply prayer, I will not hear; your
hands are full of blood.

16 Wash you, make you clean; remove the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes; cease to do evil,

17 Learn to do well; seek judgment, correct the oppressore
judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.

18 Come now, and let us confer together, saith the LORD;
though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow:
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

19 If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the
land:

20 But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be eaten (by) the sword
for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it.

21 How is the faithful city become an harlot! she (that) was
full of judgment, righteousness lodged in her; but now murderers:

22 Thy silver is become dross, thy wine impaired with water:

23 Thy princes (are) rebellious, and companions of thieves:
every one of them loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards: they
judge not the fatherless, ’doth the cause of the widow
come unto them.

24 Therefore thus saith the Lord, the LORD of hosts, the
mighty one of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and
avenge me of mine enemies.

25 And I will bring back mine hand upon thee, and purge
away as (with) lye thy dross, and take away all thine alloy:

26 And I will restore thy judges as at the ﬁrst, and thy
counsellors as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt be called
Citadel of righteousness, faithful city.

27 Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts
with righteousness.

28 And (there shall be) a shattering of the rebels and of the
sinners together, and they that forsake the LORD shall come to an
end.

29 For they shall be ashamed of the terebinths which ye have
desired, and ye shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have
chosen.

30 For ye shall be as a terebinth whose leaf withereth, and as
a garden that hath no water.

31 And the strong shall become as tow, and his work as a
spark, and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench
them.

II. 1 The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning
Judah and Jerusalem.

2 And it shall come to pass in the end of the days, the mountain
of the ’S house shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and shall be lifted up above the hills; and all nations
shall ﬂow unto it.

3 And many peoples shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go
up tothe mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of
Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the
LORD from Jerusalem.

4 And he shall judge between the nations, and shall decide for
many peoples; and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares,
and their spears into pruning hooks; nation shall not lift up
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

5 O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of
the LORD.

6 For thou hast forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob,
because they be replenished from the East, and are soothsayers
like the Philistines, and strike hands with the children of aliens.

7 And their land is full of silver and gold, neither is there any
end of their treasures; and their land is full of horses, neither is
there any end of their chariots:

8 And their land is full of false gods: they worship the work
of their own hands, that which their own ﬁngers have made:

9 And the mean man is bowed down, and the great man is
brought low; and forgive them not.

10 Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, from before
the fear of the LORD, and from the glory of his majesty.

11 The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness
of men shall be bowed down, and the LORD alone shall be
exalted in that day.

12 For the LORD of Hosts hath a day upon every one that is
proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up; and he
shall be brought low:

13 And upon all the cedars of Lebanon, high and lifted up,
and upon all the oaks of Bashan,

14 And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills
that are lifted up,

15 And upon every lofty tower, and upon every fenced wall,

16 And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all images of
desire;

17 And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the
haughtiness of men shall be made low: and the LORD alone shall
be exalted in that day.

18 And the false gods—the whole shall pass away.

19 And they shall go into the caves of the rocks, and into the
holes of the dust, from before the fear of the LORD, and from the
glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to terrify the earth.

20 In that day a man shall cast his false gods of silver, and his
false gods of gold, which they made for him to worship, to the
moles and to the bats;

21 To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the crevices of
the crags, from before the fear of the LORD, and from the glory of
his majesty, when he ariseth to terrify the earth.

22 Cease ye from man, in whose nostrils is a breath; for
wherein is he to be accounted of ?

III. 1 For behold, the Lord, the LORD of Hosts, doth take
away from Jerusalem and from Judah the stay and the staff, the
whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water,

2 Mighty man, and man of war, judge, and prophet, and
diviner, and elder,

3 Captain of ﬁfty, and him that is high of face, and counsellor,
and cunning artificer, and skilled enchanter,

4 And I will give children to be their princes, and freakishness
shall rule over them.

5 And the people shall oppress one another, each against
another, and each against his neighbour; the child shall be
insolent against the ancient, and the vile against the honourable.

6 When a man shall take hold of his brother in) the house of
his father: Thou hast clothing, thou shalt be our ruler, and let
this ruin be under thy hand:

7 In that day shall he lift up (his voice) saying, I will not be a
binder up: for in my house is neither bread nor clothing; ye
shall not make me a ruler of the people.

8 For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen; because their
tongue and their doings are against the LORD, to defy the eyes of
his glory.

9 The show of their face doth witness against them; and they
declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their
soul! for they have awarded evil unto themselves.

10 Say ye to the righteous, that it is well; for they shall eat the
fruit of their doings.

11 Woe unto the wicked, it is ill! for the reward of his hands
shall be given him.

12 My people, their oppressors are children, and women rule
over them. My people, they which lead thee cause thee to err,
and swallow up the way of thy paths.

13 The LORD standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the
peoples.

14 The LORD will enter into judgment with the elders of his
people, and the princes thereof; and ye—ye have eaten up
vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your houses.

15 What mean ye, that ye crush my people, and grind the face
of the poor? saith the Lord GOD of Hosts.

16 And the LORD said, Because the daughters of Zion are
haughty, and walk with throat stretched out and staring eyes;
tripping along they go, and making a tinkling with their feet:

17 Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the-crown of the
head of the daughters of Zion, and the LORD will lay bare their
secret parts.

18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of the
anklets, and headbands, and crescents,

19 The pendants, and the bracelets, and the veils,

20 The head-tires, and the stepping chains, and the sashes, and
the scent-boxes, and the amulets,

21 The (seal) rings, and nose-jewels,

22 The festal robes, and the mantles, and the shawls, and the
satchels,

23 The glasses, and the linen shifts, and the turbans, and the
scarfs.

24 And it shall be, instead of sweet spices there shall be
rottenness; and instead of a girdle a rope; and instead of curled
hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth;
brandinginstead of beauty.

25 Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy might in the war.

26 And her gates shall lament and mourn; and she shall be
emptied; on the ground shall she sit.

IV. 1 And in that day seven women shall take hold of
one man, saying, We will eat our own bread, and wear our own
apparel; only let thy name be called upon us; take away our
reproach.

2 In that day. shall the sprout of the LORD be for ornament
and for glory, and the fruit of the earth shall be for pride and for
beauty to them that are escaped of Israel.

3 And it shall be, that he that is left in Zion, and remaineth
in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, every one that is written down
for living in Jerusalem.

4 When the Lord shall have washed away the ﬁlth of the
daughters of Zion, and shall have purged away the blood of
Jerusalem from the midst of her by the spirit of judgment, and
by the spirit of burning.

5 And the LORD will create upon every habitation of mount
Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud by day, and smoke, and
the shining of a ﬂaming ﬁre by night; for upon all the glory is a
canopy,

6 And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day-time
from the heat, and for a refuge and for a covert from storm and
from rain.

V. I Let me, I pray, sing for my beloved a song of my
loved one for his vineyard. My beloved bath a vineyard, on
a hill-top, the son of oil;

2 And he digged it, and cleared it of stones, and planted it
with the vine of Sorek, and built a tower in the midst of it, and
also hewed out a wine-fat therein; and he looked that it should
bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild-grapes.

3 And now, ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and man of Judah,
judge, I pray, betwixt me and my vineyard.

4 What is there yet to do to my vineyard, that I have not
done in it? Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth
grapes, brought it forth wild-grapes?

5 And now let me, I pray, tell you what I will do to my
vineyard; Ι will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be
consumed; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be
trodden down;

6 And I will make it a waste; it shall not be pruned, nor
hoed; and there shall come up briers and thorns; and I will
command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.

7 For the vineyard of the LORD of Hosts is the house of Israel,
and the man of Judah his pleasant plant 3 and he looked for judg-
ment, and behold oppression; for righteousness, and behold a cry.

8 Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay ﬁeld to
ﬁeld, till there is no room, and ye are made to dwell alone in the
midst of the earth!

9 In mine ears (said) the LORD of Hosts, If there be not many
houses desolate, great ones and fair, without inhabitant!

10 Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and a
homer of seed shall yield an ephah.

11 Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they
may follow strong drink; that tarry late in the dusk, while wine
inflames them!

12 And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine,
are their banquet; but they regard not the work of the LORD,
neither consider the operation of his hands.

13 Therefore my people are gone into captivity, for lack of
knowledge: and their glory are men of famine, and their
abundance dried up with thirst.

14 Therefore Sheol hath enlarged her appetite, and opened
her mouth without measure: and her honour, and her abundance,
and her uproar, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into her.

15 And the mean man shall be brought down, and the
mighty man shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall
be. humbled:

16 And the LORD of Hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and
God that is holy sheweth himself holy in righteousness.

17 Then shall the lambs feed as (in) their pasture, and the
waste places of the fat ones shall sojourners eat.

18 Woe, they that drag iniquity with cords of vanity, and
(their) sin as it were with a cart rope:

19 That say, Let him make speed, let him hasten his work,
that we may see: and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel
draw nigh and come, that we may know;

20 Woe, they that call evil good, and good evil; that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet,
and sweet for bitter!

21 Woe, they that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in
their own sight!

22 Woe, they that are mighty to drink wine, and men of
strength to ’strong drink:

23 Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the
justice of the just from him!

24 Therefore as the tongue of ﬁre devoureth the stubble, and
the dry grass sinketh down in ﬂame, their root shall be as rottenness,
and their blossom shall go up as dust: because they have
rejected the law of the LORD of Hosts, and despised the word of
the Holy One of Israel.

25 Therefore is the anger of the LORD kindled against his
people, and he hath stretched ’ his hand against them, and
hath smitten them; and the hills did tremble, and their carcases
were as refuse in the midst of the open places. For all this his
anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

26 And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and
will hiss unto them from the end of the earth: and behold, they
shall come with speed swiftly:

27 None shall be weary, nor stumble among. them; none shall
slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed,
nor the latchet of their shoes be broken:

28 Whose arrows are sharpened, and all his bows bent, his
’ hoofs shall be counted like flint. and his wheels like. a
whirlwind:

29 His roar is like a ’; he shall roar like young lions;
and he growleth, and seizeth the prey, and shall carry it away safe,
and none shall deliver it.

30 And in that day he shall growl over him, as the growling of
the sea; and if one look unto the earth, behold darkness, distress,
and light; it groweth dark in the heavens thereof.

VI. 1 In the year that king Uzziah died saw I the Lord
sitting ’upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train ﬁlled the
temple.

2 Seraphim stood above him; each one had six wings; with
twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and
with twain he did ﬂy.

3 And one kept crying unto another, and saying, Holy, holy,
holy, is the LORD of Hosts; all the earth is full of his glory.

4 And the bases of the thresholds were shaken at the voice (of
him) that cried, and the house began to fill with smoke.

5 And I said, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a
man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of
unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King, the LORD of
Hosts.

6 And there ﬂew one of the seraphim unto me, and in his
’ hand a live coal, which. he had taken with the tongs from OH the
altar;

7 And he made it touch my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath
touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin
atoned for.

8 And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I
send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I, send
me.

9 And. he-said, Go, and say to this people, Certainly hear ye,
but understand not; and see ye, but perceive not.

10 Make the heart of this people fat, and makeitheir ears
heavy, and smear over their eyes; lest they see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and
turn again, and one heal them.

11 And I said, Until when, Lord? And he said, Until the cities
be wasted, without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and
the land be utterly desolate,

12 And the LORD removed men far away, and great be
the forsaken (tract) in the midst of the land.

13 And still in it (there is) a tenth, and it shall turn again, and
be for consuming: as a terebinth, and as an oak, whose stock is
in them when they are felled: a holy seed is the stock thereof.

VII. 1 And it came to pass the days of Ahaz the son of
Jotham, the son of Uaziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of
Aram, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up
toward Jerusalem to war against it, but succeeded not in warring
against it.

2 And it was told the house of David, saying, Aram rested

3 And the LORD said unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz,
thou, and Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the
upper pool in the highway of the fuller's ﬁeld;

4 And say unto him, Take heed, and be quiet; fear not,
neither be faint-hearted for these two tails of smoking firebrands.
for the fierce anger of Rezin with Aram, and of the son of
Remaliah.

5 Because Aram hath taken evil counsel against thee, Ephraim
and the son of Remaliah, saying,

6 Let us go up against Judah, and terrify it, and let us take it
by storm for ourselves, and set up a king in the midst of it, even
’ the son of Tabeal:

7 Thus saith the Lord GOD, It shall not stand, neither shall it
come to pass.

8 For the head of Aram is Damascus, and the head of
Damascus is Rezin; and within threescore and ﬁve years Vshall
Ephraim be broken, that it be not a people.

9 And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the-head of
Samaria is ’s son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall
not be established.

10 And the LORD spake again unto Ahaz, saying,

11 Ask thee a sign of the LORD thy God: ask, going deep or
mounting high.

12 And Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the
LORD.

13 And he said, Hear ye now, house of David; is its too
little for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also?

14 Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold,
the is with child, and beareth a son, and shall call his name
Immanuel.

15 Butter and honey shall he eat, as he leameth to refuse the
evil, and choose the good.

16 For before the child learn to refuse the evil, and choose the
good, the land shall be forsaken, whose two kings thou fearest.

17 The LORD shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people,
and upon thy ’s house, days that have not come, from the
day that Ephraim departed from Judah; the king of Assyria.

18 And it shall be in that. day, that the LORD shall hiss to the
ﬂy that is at the end of the rivers of Egypt, and to the bee that is
in the land of Assyria.

19 And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the
precipitous valleys, and in the crevices of the rocks, and upon all
thorn bushes, and upon all pastures.

20 In that day shall the LORD shave with the razor that is hired,
(which is) beyond the river, the king of Assyria; the head, and.
the hair of the feet, and the beard also shall it sweep away.

21 And it shall be in that day, that a man shall nourish a
heifer of kine, and two sheep;

22 And it sheu be, from the abundance of milk they give, he
shall eat butter; for butter and honey shall everyone eat, that is ’
left in the land.

23 And it shall be, in that day, that every place shall be, where
there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, it shall be
I for briers and thorns.

24 With arrows and with bows shall one come thither; because
all the land shall become briers and thorns.

25 And all the hills thatwere hoed with the hoe, thou shalt
not come hither for fear of briers and thorns; but it shall be for
the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of sheep.

VIII. 1 And the LORD said unto me, Take thee a great
’ and write upon it with a ’s pen, For Maher-shalal-
hash-baz.

2 And I will take unto me faithful witnesses to witness, Uriah
the priest and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.

3 And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and
bare a son. Then said the LORD unto me, Call his name
Maher-shalal-hash-baz.

4 For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father,
and, My mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of
Samaria shall be taken away before the king of Assyria.

5 And the LORD spake also unto me again, saying,

6 Forasmuch as this people hath rejected the waters of
Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice with Rezin and ’s
son:

7 Now therefore, behold, the LORD bringeth up upon them
the waters of the river, strong and many, the king of Assyria,
and all his glory; and he shall come up over all his channels,
and go over all his banks:

8 And he shall sweep on into Judah; he shall overflow and
pass through; to the neck shall he reach, and the stretching out
of his wings shall ﬁll the breadth of thy land, Immanuel.

9 Rage, ye peoples, and be broken; and give ear, all distant
parts of the earth; gird yourselves, and be broken! gird yourselves,
and be broken!

10 Take counsel, and it shall come to nought; speak a word,
and it shall not stand; for God is with us.

11 For the LORD spake thus to me with strength. of hand,
and instructed me not to walk in the way of this people,
saying,

12 Say ye not, A conspiracy, of all whereof this people saith,
A conspiracy 3 and fear not the fear of it, nor be afraid:

13 The LORD of Hosts, him shall ye sanctify; and let him be
your fear, and let him be your dread.

14 And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of
stumbling, and for a rock of offence, to both the houses of Israel,
for a and for. a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

15 And many shall stumble upon them, and fall, and be
broken, and be snared, and be taken.

16 Bind thou up the testimony, seal the law among my
disciples.

17 And I will wait for the LORD, that hideth his face from
the house of Jacob; and will hope in him.

18 Behold, I and the children whom the LORD hath given
me are for signs and portents in Israel from the LORD of Hosts,
which dwelleth in mount Zion.

19 And when they shall say unto you, Inquire of the necromancers
and the wizards, that peep and that mutter; should not
a people inquire of its God? (should they inquire) of the dead
on behalf of the living?

20 To the law and to the testimony! if they speak not according
to this word, surely there is no dawn for him.

21 And he shall pass through it, hardly arid hungry;
and it shall be, when he shall be hungry, he shall fret himself,
and revile his king and his God, and shall face upward:

22 And he shall look unto the earth; and behold, trouble
and darkness, dimness of anguish; and into gloom is be driven
away.

IX. I Yet there is no darkness to her that had distress.
As at the ﬁrst he brought into contempt the land of Zabulon
and the land of Naphthali, so in the‘latter time he (hath)
brought honour to the way of the sea, beyond— Jordan, Galilee
of the nations.

2 The people that walk in darkness have seen a great light:
they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them
’ · hath the light shined.

3 Thou hast multiplied the nation, thou hast increased its
joyz’ they joy before thee like the joy in harvest, and as men
exult when they divide the spoil.

4 For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staﬂ’
of his shoulder, the rod of his exactor, as in the day of Midian.

5 For every boot of him that is booted with tumult, and the
cloke rolled in blood—it shall be for burning, for fuel of ﬁre.

6 For a child is born unto us, a son is given unto us; and
the government is upon his shoulder; and his name is called
Wonder, Counsellor, Mighty God, Father of Eternity, Prince
of Peace. ’

7 To the increase of his government and to peace there is
no end, upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom, to
establish it and to sustain it with judgment and with righteous-
ness from henceforth and for ever. The jealousy of the LORD
of Hosts will do this.

8 The LORD sent a word into Jacob, and it shall fall upon
Israel.

9 And the whole people, they shall know, Ephraim and the
inhabitant of Samaria, that say in pride and stoutness of heart,

10 Bricks are fallen, and we will build with hewn stones;
sycamores are cut down, and we will change (them) forcedars.

11 Therefore the LORD hath set up the adversaries of Rezin
against him, and stirred up his enemies;

12 Aram before, and the Philistines behind: and they devoUr
Israelwith open mouth. For all this his anger is not turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still.

13 And the people hath not turned unto him that smiteth
them, neither have they sought the LORD of hosts.

14 And the LORD will cut off from Israel head and tail, palm
branch and rush, in one day.

15 The elder and honourable, he is the head: and the prophet
that teacheth lies, he is the tail.

16 And the leaders of this people cause them to err; and those
of them that are led are swallowed up.

17 Therefore the Lord shall not rejoice over its young men,
neither shall have mercy on its fatherless and widows; for every
one thereof is impious and an evil doer, and every mouth
speaketh folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, but
his hand is stretched out still.

18 For wickedness burned as a ﬁre: briers and thorns it
devoured, and it kindled the thickets of the forest, and they
were. whirled upward with a lifting-up of smoke.

19 With the wrath of the LORD of Hosts is the land turned
black, and the people are become as food for ﬁre; they spared
not a man his brother.

20 And one snatched on the right hand, and was hungry; and
ate on the left hand, and they were not satisfied: every man the
ﬂesh of his arm did they eat:

21 Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Mahasseh: they
together against Judah. For all this his anger is not turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still.

X. 1 Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and
to scribes that prescribe oppression:

2 To turn aside the weak from judgment, and to strip the
right from the poor of I my people, that widows may be their
spoil, and that they may prey on orphans.

3 And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the
ruin that cometh from far? to whom will ye ﬂee for help? and
where will ye leave your glory?

4 (Nought remains), but to crouch under the prisoners, and
fall under the slain. For all this his anger is not turned away,
but his hand is stretched out still.

5 Ah, Asshur, the rod of mine anger, and a staff is it in.
their hand, mine indignation.

6 I will send him against an impious nation, and against the
people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to spoil the spoil
and to prey on the prey, and to make them a treading down
like the mire of the streets.

7 And he, he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think
so; but it is in his heart to work destruction, and to cut off
nations not a few.

8 For he saith, Are not my princes altogether kings?

9 Is not Calno as Carchemish, or Hamath as Arpad, or
Samaria as Damascus?

10 As my hand hath found the kingdoms of the false—
and their images were more than Jerusalem and—
rr Shall I not, as I have done to Samaria and her false gods,
so do to Jerusalem and her offences?

12 And it shall be, when the Lord hath ﬁnished his whole
work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will visit upon the
fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria, and the glorying
of his loftiness of eyes.

13 For he saith, By the strength of my hand I have done it,
and by my wisdom, for I (can) discern: and I have removed the
bounds of peoples, and robbed their treasures, and brought down,
like a mighty one, them that ’enthroned:

14 And my hand hath reached, as a nest, the riches of
the peoples; and as one gathereth eggs that are left, have
I gathered all the earth; and there. was none that ﬂuttered
a wing, or opened a mouth, or peeped.

15 Shall the axe glory against him that heweth therewith?
Shall the saw magnify itself against him that plieth it? as if
a rod should ply them that lift it up, as if a staff should lift
up what is not wood.

16 Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, send among
his fat ones leanness; and under his glory there shall burn a
burning like the burning of ﬁre.

17 And the light of Israel shall be for a ﬁre, and his Holy
One for a ﬂame; and it shall burn and devour his thorns and
his briers in one day;

18 And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his
garden-land, from soul and even to. ﬂesh; and it shall be as
when a sick ’man pinetb away.

19 And the remnant of the trees of his forest shall be few,
and a child may write them.

20 And it shall be in that day, the remnant of Israel, and
such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again
lean upon him that smote them; but shall lean upon the Lord,
the Holy One of Israel, in truth.

21 The remnant shall return, the remnant of Jacob, unto the
Mighty God.

22 For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea,
a remnant (only) of it shall return; destruction is decided,
overﬂowing in righteousness.

23 For a destruction and a decision shall the Lord GOD of
Hosts make, in the midst of all the earth.

24 Therefore thus saith the Lord God of Hosts, Be not afraid,
my people that dwellest in Zion, of Asshur; though he smite
thee with a rod, and lift up his staff against thee, in the way
of Egypt.

25 For yet a very little while, and indignation shall be at an
end, and mine anger shall be to their destruction.

26 And the LORD of Hosts shall stir up a scourge against him
like the smiting of Midian at the rock Oreb ; and his rod is upon
the sea, and he lifteth it up, in the way of Egypt.

27 And it shall be in that day, his burden shall remove from
off thy shoulder, and his yoke from of? thy neck, and the yoke
shall be destroyed by reason of fatness.

28 He is come upon Aiath, he is passed through Migron; at
Michmash he layeth up his baggage;

29 They pass through the pass: in Geba they make their
lodging; Ramah trembleth: Gibeah of Saul ﬂeeth.

30 Cry out with thy voice, O daughter of Gallim: listen,
Laishah; O thou poor Anathoth!

31 Madmenah wandereth away; the inhabitants of Gebim
gather (their goods) to ﬂee.

32 Within this very day he halteth at Nob, waving his hand
(at) the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem.

33 Behold, the Lord, the LORD of Hosts, shall lop the leafy
bough with terror; and the high ones of stature shall be hewn
down, and the haughty shall be humbled.

34 And he shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron,
and Lebanon shall fall by a majestic one.

XI. 1 And there shall come forth a shoot out of the stock
of Jesse, and a Branch out of his roots shall bear fruit;

2 And the Spirit of the LORD shall rest upon him, a spirit of
wisdom and discernment, a spirit of counsel and might, a spirit
of knowledge and of the fear of the LORD:

3 And he shall breathe in the fear of l the LORD: and he shall
not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither decide after the
hearing of his ears:

4 But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and decide
with equity for ’ meek of the earth: and he shall smite the
earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breather his lips
shall he slay the wicked.

5 And righteousness shall be the girdle of. his loins, and
faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

6 And the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard
lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and
the fatling together; and a little child their leader.

7 And the cow and the bear shall graze: their young ones
shall lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

8 And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp,
and the weaned child shall stretch his hand upon the ’s den.

9 They shall not do evil or deal corruptly in all my. holy
mountain; for the earth shall be ﬁlled with the knowledge of the
LORD, as the waters cover the sea.

10 And it shall be in that day; the root of Jesse, which
standeth for an ensign of the peoples, of him shall the nations
inquire: and his resting-place shall be glory.

11 And it shall be in that day, the Lord shall set his hand
again the second time to purchase the remnant of his people
which shall remain from ASsyria, and from Egypt, and from
Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and
from llamath, and from the isles of the sea.

12 And he shalllift up an ensign for the nations, and shall
gather the outcasts of Israel, and collect the dispersed of Judah
from the four corners of the earth.

13 And the jealousy of Ephraim shall remove, and the adversaries
of Judah shall be cut 06; Ephraim shall not be jealous
of Judah, and Judah shall not be adverse to Ephraim.

14 And they shall light upon the shoulder of the Philistines
toward the west; they shall spoil the children of the east to-
gether; Edom and Moab shall be the putting forth of their hand,
and the children of Ammon their obedience.

15 And. the LORD shall lay under a ban the tongue of the
Egyptian sea; and with the violence of his wind shall he wave
his hand over the river, and shall smite it into seven streams,
and make men go over dryshod.

16 And there shall be a highway for the remnant of his
people, which shall remain from Assyria; as there was for Israel
in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.

XII. I And in that day thou shalt say, O LORD, I will thank
thee; for thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away,
and thou comfortedst me.

2 Behold, God my salvation: I will trust, and not be afraid;
for JAH the LORD is my strength and song; and he is become my
salvation.

3 And ye shall draw water with joy out of the wells of-
salvation.

4 And in that day shall ye say, Give thanks to the LORD,
proclaim in his name, make known his deeds among the peoples,
make mention that his name is exalted.

5 Make music to the LORD, for he hath wrought excellence:
let this be known in all the earth.

6 Cry out and shout, thou inhabitress of Zion; for great is
the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.

XIII. 1 The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of
Amoz did see.

2 Lift ye up an ensign upon a bare mountain; raise (the
voice) unto them, wave the hand, that they may go into the
gates of the nobles.

3 I, I have charged my consecrated ones, ’have also called
my mighty ones for mine anger, that exult in my excellence.

4 The voice of an uproar, like as of a great people; the voice
of a tumult of the kingdoms of nations gathered together; the
LORD of Hosts mustereth a host of war.

5 They come from a far country, from the end of the heavens;
the LORD, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the
whole earth.

6 Howl ye; for the day of the LORD ’is at hand; it shall come
as a destruction from the Almighty.

7 Therefore shall all hands be slack, and every ’s heart
shall melt,

8 And they shall be dismayed: pangs and sorrows shall take
hold of them; they shall writhe as a travailing woman; they shall
look aghast one at another: faces of ﬂame are their faces.

9 Behold, the ’day of the LORD cometh, cruel, and wrath and
ﬁerce anger, to make the earth a desolation, and he will destroy
the sinners thereof out of it.

10 For the stars of heaven, and the Orions thereof, shall not
give forth their light; the sun shall be dark at his going forth, and
the moon shall not cause her light to shine.

11 And I will punish the world for evil, and the wicked for
their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to
cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible.

12 I will make a man more precious than ﬁne gold, and man-
kind than the (pure) gold of. Ophir.

13 Therefore will make the heavens tremble, and the earth
shall be disquieted from her place, at the wrath of the LORD of
Hosts, and in the day of the heat of his anger.

14 And it shall be as (with) a chased roe; and as sheep, and
there is none that gathereth; they shall every man turn to his
own people, and ﬂee everyone to his own land.

15. Everyone that is found shall be thrust through, and every-
one that is taken shall fall by the sword.

16 And their infants shall be dashed to pieces before their
eyes; their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished.

17 Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall
not regard silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight in it.

18 And bows shall dash youths in pieces; and they shall have
no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not have mercy
on children.

19 And Babylon, the beauty of kingdoms, the glory of the
pride of the Chaldees, shall be as ’s overthrow of Sodom
and Gomorrah.

20 It shall not inhabited for ever, neither shall it be dwelt
in from generation to generation; neither shall the Arabian pitch
tent there, neither shall shepherds make (flocks) to lie down
dwarf. But desert creatures shall lie there; and their houses shall
groaners ﬁll; and ostriches shall dwell there; and shaggy beasts
shall dance there.

22 And wolves shall howl in their castles, and jackals in
palaces ’of pleasure; and her time is near to come, and her
days shall not be prolonged.

XIV. 1 For the LORD will have compassion on Jacob, and
will yet (again) choose Israel, and set them on their own ground:
and the stranger shall join himself unto them, and they shall
cleave to the house of Jacob.

2 And peoples shall take them, and bring them to their place
and the house of Israel shall take them as their possession upon
the ’s ground for servants and for handmaids; and they
shall be captors to their captors 3 and they shall rule over their
oppressors.

3 And it shall be in that day that the LORD giveth thee rest
from thy pain and thy disquiet, and from the hard bondage which
was laid upon thee,

4 That thou shalt take up this ’parable over the king Of
Babylon, and say, How hath the oppressor ceased, the insolence
ceased!

5 The LORD hath broken the staff of the the rod of
rulers,

6 Which smote peoples in wrath with a continual stroke, ruled
over nations in anger with a pursuit that none restrained.

7 The whole earth is at rest, is quiet; they break forth into
Singing.

8 Yea, the ﬁr trees rejoice at thee, the cedars of Lebanon,
(saying,) Since thou hast lain down, the feller cometh not up
against us.

9 Hell (from) beneath is disquieted for thee, to meet thee at
thy coming; it stirreth up the Shades for thee, all the chief ones
of the earth; ’ raiseth from their thrones all the kings of the
nations.

10 All they shall answer and say ’unto thee, Thou also art
made weak as we ἦ thou art made like unto us!

11 Thy pride is brought down to hell, the noise of thy viols;
the maggot is spread under thee, and the worm is thy covering.

12 How art thou fallen from heaven, Lucifer, son of the
dawn; how art thou hewn down to the ground, which didst lay
low the nations!

13 And thou, thou sajdst in thy heart, I will ascend the
heavens; I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; and I
will sit upon the mount of assembly, in the recesses of the north:

14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will
make myself like the most High.

15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the recesses of
the pit.

16 They that see thee shall look narrowly on thee, shall gaze
earnestly on thee: Is this the man that did disquiet the earth,
that made kingdoms tremble?

17 (That) made the world as a wilderness, and broke down the
cities thereof; that loosed not his prisoners homeward
18 All ’s of nations, all of them, have lain down in glory,
each in his house.

19 But thou art cast out away from thy sepulchre like a
rejected branch, clothed with the slain, that are thrust through
with the sword, that go down to the stones of the pit, like a
trampled carcase.

20 Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou
’destroyed thy land, slain thy people: the seed of evil doers
shall not be named, for ever.

21 Prepare for his sons (a place of) slaughter, for the iniquity
of their fathers; that they rise not up, and possess the earth, nor
ﬁll the face of the world with cities.

22 And I will rise up against them, saith the LORD of Hosts,
and cut off from Babylon name, and remnant, and issue, and
offspring: saith the LORD.

23 And I will make it a possession for the bittern, and pools
of water; and I will sweep it away with the besom of destruction,
’the LORD of Hosts.

24 The LORD of Hosts hath- Sworn, saying, Surely as I have
planned, so shall it be, and as I have purposed, that shall stand:

25 To break Asshur in my land, and on my mountains I will
trample him; and his yoke shall remove from off them, and his
burden shall remove from off his shoulder.

26 This is the purpose which is purposed upon the whole
earth; and this the hand that is stretched out upon all the
nations.

27 For the LORD of Hosts hath purposed, and who shall
disannul it? and his is the outstretched hand, and who shall
turn it back?

28 In the year of the death of king Ahaz was this burden.

29 Rejoice not, Philistia, all. of thee, that the rod which smote
thee is broken: for out of the ’s root shall come forth a
viper, and its fruit a ﬂying fiery serpent.

30 And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy
shall lie down in security; and I will kill-thy root with. famine,
and he shall slay thy remnant.

31 Howl, gate; cry, city; melt away, Philistia, all of
thee; for there cometh from the north a smoke, and there is
no straggler in his ranks.

32 And what shall one answer the messengers of a nation?
That the LORD hath founded Zion, and in her shall the afflicted
of his ’e take refuge.

XV. 1 The burden of Moab. For in a night Ar of Moab
is laid waste, is destroyed; for in a night Kit- of Moab is laid
waste, is destroyed:

2 He is gone up to the house, and Dibon, the high places, to
weep; Moab howleth upon Nebo, and upon Medeba; on all his
heads (is) baldness, every beard cut off.

3 In his streets they are girded with sackcloth; on her roofs
and in her broad places all of her howleth, running down with
weeping.

4 And Heshbon crieth, and Elealeh; their voiCe is heard unto
Jahaz; therefore the armed men of Moab cry out; his soul
trembleth within him.

5 My heart crieth out for Moab; her bars reach unto Zoar;
a heifer of three years old: for the ascent of Luhith, with
weeping doth he go up by it; for in the way of Horonaim
they raise a cry of destruction.

6 For the waters of Nimrim are desolations; the grass is
withered, the herbage is consumed, there is no green thing.

7 Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and their treasure,
shall they carry away over the brook of willows.

8 For the cry is gone round about the borders of ’ Moab;
her howling (hath reached) unto Eglaim, and to Beer-elim her
howling.

9 For ’waters of Dimon are full of blood; forI will bring
more upon Dimon, a lion for the escaped of Moab, and for the
remnant of the land.

XVI. 1. Send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land, from
Sela toward the wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of
Zion.

2 And it shall be, like wandering birds, a scattered nest, shall
the daughters of Moab be at the fords of Arnon.

3 Apply counsel, execute a decision; make thy shadow as the
night in the midst of the noonday; hide outcasts; discover not
him that wandereth.

4 Let the outcasts of Moab dwell with thee; be thou a hiding
place to them from the face of the destroyer; for the extortioner
is brought to an end, destruction is ﬁnished, the trampler is
consumed out of the land.

5 And a throne is established in mercy, and one shall sit upon
it in truth in the tent of David, judging, and seeking judgment,
and swift to do righteousness.

6 We have heard of the pride of Moab, proud ekceedingly;
his proudness, and his pride, and his wrath; not so are his
boastings.

7 Therefore Moab shall howl for Moab, altogether shall he
howl; for the raisin cakes of Kir-haresheth shall ye mourn, utterly
smltten.

8 For the ﬁelds of Heshbon languish; the vine of Sibmah, the
lords of nations struck down her choice plants; they reached
unto Jazer, they strayed into the wilderness; her offshoots spread
abroad, they went over the Sea.

9 Therefore I will weep with theweeping of Jazer (for) the
vine of Sibmah; I will water thee with my tears, OHeshbon and
Elealeh; for on thy summer fruit and on thy harvest shouting is
fallen.

10 And taken away is joy, and gladness, from the garden
land; and iri the vineyards there is no singing, no calling; the
treader treadeth no wine in the presses; I have made shouting
to cease.

11 Therefore my bowels shall sound like the harp for Moab,
and mine inward. parts for Kir-hares.

12 And it shall be, when Moab hath appeared, when he hath
wearied himself upon the high place, and entereth his sanctuary
to pray, (then) he shall not prevail.

13 This is the word that the LORD hath spoken concerning
Moab hitherto:

14 And now the LORD hath spoken, saying: Within three
years, as the years of a hireling, and the glory of Moab shall be
brought into contempt, with all the great multitude; and the.
remnant shall be small, little, not strong.

XVII. 1 The burden of Damascus. 
 Behold, Damascus is removed from (being) a city, and be-
cometh a heap, a ruin.

2 The cities of Aroer are forsaken: they shall be for ﬂocks,
and they shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid.

3 And the fortress shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom
from Damascus, and the remnant of Aram: they shall be as the
glory of the children of Israel, saith the LORD of Hosts.

4 And it shall be in that day, the glory of ’Jacob shall be made
thin, and the fatness of his ﬂesh shall wax lean.

5 And it shall be as when the harvestman graspeth the standing
Corn, and his arm reapeth the ears 3 and it shall be as one that
gleaneth ears in the valley of Rephaim.

6 And there shall be left therein gleanings, as at the beating of
an olive tree, two or three berries at the top of a crest, four or ﬁve
in the fruit ’s branches, saith the LORD God of Israel.

7 In that day shall (a) man look toward -his Maker, and his
eyes shall gaze upon the Holy One of Israel.

8 And he shall not look to the altars, the work of his hands,
neither shall gaze upon what his ﬁngers made, either the Asherim
or the sun-images.

9 In that day shall his strong cities be as the forsaken tract of
-the woodland and the mountain crest, which men forsook from
before the children of Israel 5 and there shall be a desolation.

10 For thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, and hast
not been mindful of the rock of thy strength; therefore thou
plantest plants of pleasantness, and settest them with slips of a
stranger;

11 In the day of thy planting dost thou make a hedge, and in
the morning thou makest thy seed to bud; a harvest heap in the
day; of pain and deadly sorrow.

12 Ah, the uproar of many peoples, they roar like the roaring
of seas; and the tumult of nations, they are tumultuous like the
tumult of mighty waters l

13 Nations are tumultuous like the tumult of many waters; and
(one) rebuketh him, and he ﬂeeth afar off, and is chased as the
chaff of the mountains before the wind, and as whirling dust before
the tempest.

14 At eventide, and behold terror; before the morning, he is
not. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them
that rob us.

XVIII. 1 Ah, land of the rustling of wings, whichart beyond
the rivers of Cush !

2 That sendest envoys on the sea, and in vessels of papyrus on
the face of the waters: Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation tall
and polished, to a people terrible since it was and onward, a
nation of line, line, and treading down, whose land the rivers
divide.

3 All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth,
when a standard is lifted up on (the) mountains, see ye: and
when a trumpet is blown, hear ye.

4 For so the Lord said unto me: I will be quiet, and I will
behold in my dwelling place, while there is clear heat upon the
light, a mist-cloud in the heat of harvest.

5 For afore the harvest, when the blossom is over, and the
ﬂower becometh a ripening grape-bunch, he shall cut off the sprigs
with pruning hooks, and remove and cut down the branches.

6 They shall be left together unto the bird of prey of the
mountains, and to the beasts of the earth; and the bird-of prey
shall summer upon it, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter
upon it.

7 In that time shall a present be brought unto the Lord of
Hosts, a people tall and polished, and from a people terrible since
it was and onward: a nation of line, line, and treading down,
whose land the rivers divide: unto the place of the name of the
Lord of Hosts, mount Zion.

1 Behold, the Lord rideth upon a swift cloud, and cometh to
Egypt; and the false gods of Egypt shall shake at his presence,
and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it.

2 And I will stir up Egypt against Egypt, and they shall ﬁght
everyone against his brother, and everyone against his neighbour;
city against city, kingdom against kingdom.

3 And the spirit of Egypt shall be made empty in the midst
of it; and I will swallow up the counsel thereof; and they shall
inquire of the false gods, and the mutterers, and them that have
familiar spirits, and the wizards.

4 And I will confine Egypt into the hand of a hard lord; and
a harsh king shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the Lord of
Hosts.

5 And the waters shall waste fromthe sea, and the river shall
be parched and dried up.

6 And the rivers shall stink, the canals of Mazor are emptied
and parched up ; reed and ﬂag wither.

7 The meadows by the Nile, by the brink of the Nile, and
every sown ﬁeld by the Nile, shall dry up, be driven away, and
be no more.

8 And the ﬁshers shall sigh, and all they that cast angle into
the Nile shall mourn, and they that spread nets upon the face
of the waters shall languish.

9 And they that work combed ﬂax, and they that weave white
cloth, shall be ashamed.

10 And her pillars shall be broken in pieces ; all that work for
hire (shall be) grieved in soul.

11 Merely fools are the princes of Zoanf as for the wise
counsellors of Pharaoh, counsel is become brutish; how can ye
say unto Pharaoh, I am a son of the wise, a son of ancient
kings?

12 Where, then, are thy wise men? (and) let them declare now
unto thee, and let them know, what the Lord of Hosts hath purposed
upon Egypt.

13 The princes of Zoan are befooled, the princes of Noph are
deceived: they have led Egypt astray, the cornerstone of her
tribes.

14 The Lord hath mingled a spirit of perverseness in the midst
of her; and they have led Egypt astray in all his work, as a
drunkard strays in his vomit.

15 Neither shall there be a work for Egypt, whichihead or tail,
palm branch or rush, can do.

16 In that day shall Egypt be as women, and shall tremble
and fear before the face of the waving of the hand of the Lord
of Hosts, which he waveth over it.

17 And the land of Judah shall be for a terror to Egypt; whosoever
maketh mention of it, unto him they turn in fear, before
the purpose of the LORD of Hosts, which he purposeth
concerning it.

18 In that day shall there be ﬁve cities in the land of Egypt
speaking the language of Canaan, and swearing to the Lord of
Hosts; one shall be called, City of destruction.

19	In that day shall there be an altar to the Lord in the
midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar near the border of it to
the Lord.

20	And it shall be for a sign and a witness unto the Lord of
Hosts in the land of Egypt: for they shall cry unto the Lord
because of (the) oppressors, and he shall send them a saviour, and
a mighty one, and shall deliver them.

21	And the Lord shall make himself known to Egypt, and the
Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall serve with
sacrifice and (meal) offering; and they shall vow a vow unto the
Lord, and perform it

22	And the Lord shall smite Egypt, smiting, and healing: and
they shall return unto the Lord, and he shall (let himself) be
intreated of them, and shall heal them.

23	In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria;
and Assyria shall come into Egypt, and Egypt into Assyria, and
the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians.
14 In that day shall Israel be a third to Egypt and Assyria,
a blessing in the midst of the earth ;

25 Forasmuch as the Lord of Hosts hath blessed him, saying,
Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands,
and mine inheritance, Israel.

XX. 1 In the year that the Tartan came unto Ashdod,
(when Sargon king of Assyria sent him,) and fought against
Ashdod, and took it:

2 At that timi spake the Lord by Isaiah the son of Amoz,
saying, Go, and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and pull
off thy shoe from thy foot And he did so, going naked and
barefoot.

3 And the Lord said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath gone
naked and barefoot, three years a sign and a portent upon Egypt
and upon Cush:

4 So shall the king of Asshur lead the captives of Egypt and
the exiles of Cush, young and old, naked and barefoot, and with
buttocks uncovered, the nakedness of Egypt.

5 And they shall be dismayed and ashamed because of Cush
their expectation and Egypt their glorying.

6 And the inhabitant of this isle shall say in that day, Behold,
thus is our expectation, whither we tied for help, to be delivered
from the face of the king of Asshur; and how shall we, we,
escape?

XXI. 1 The burden of the desert of the sea;
Like whirlwinds in the south, sweeping along; it cometh from
the wilderness, from a terrible land.

2 A hard vision is declared unto me: the treacherous dealer
dealeth treacherously, and the destroyer destroyeth. Go up,
Ο Elam: besiege, O Media; all the sighing thereof have I made
to cease.

3 Therefore my loins are ﬁlled with anguish ; pangs have taken
hold upon me, like the pangs of a woman in travail; I am bowed
with pain, so that I cannot hear; I am dismayed, so that I
cannot see.

4 My heart wandereth, horror affrighteth me; the twilight of
my desire hath he turned into trembling for me.

5 They prepare the table, they set the watch, eat, drink. Arise,
ye princes, anoint the shield.

6 For thus bath the Lord said unto me, Go, place the watchman;
what he shall see, let him declare.

7 And he saw a troop, horsemen in pairs, a troop of asses, a troop
of camels; and he hearkened with utmost hearkenings.

8 And he cried (as) a lion, O Lord, I stand continually upon
the watchtower by day, and I am placed at my post all the
nights:

9 And behold there cometh a troop of men, horsemen in
pairs; and he answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen;
and all the (graven) images of her gods he hath broken unto the
ground.

10 O my threshing, and the son of my (threshing) ﬂoor; that
which I have heard from the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel,
have I declared unto you.

11 The burden of Dumah. 
 One crieth to me out of Seir: Watchman, what (hour) of the
 night? Watchman, what (hour) of the night?

12 The watchman said, Morning cometh, and also night. If ye
will inquire, inquire ye; return, come.

13 The burden upon Arabia. 
 In the forest in Arabia shall ye lodge, ye caravans of Dedanim.

14 Bring ye water, to meet him that is thirsty; the inhabitants
of the land of Tema welcome the fugitive with his bread.

15 For they are fugitives from the face of the swords, from the
face of the drawn sword, and of the bent bow, and of the weight
of war.

16 For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Within a year, as
the years of a hireling, and all the glory of Kedar shall be
consumed;

17 And the remnant of the number of bows, the mighty men
of the sons of Kedar, shall be few; for the Lord, the God of
Israel, hath spoken it.

1 What aileth thee, then, that thou art gone up, all of thee, to
the house tops?

2 She is ﬁlled with tumult, an uproarious city, a jubilant
town; thy smitten ones are not smitten with the sword, nor dead
in battle.

3 All thy rulers are fled together; without the bow they are
made captive; all that are found of thee are made captive, they
ﬂed afar off

4 Therefore I said, Look away from me, I will weep bitterly;
press not to comfort me, for the destruction of the daughter of my
people.

5 For the Lord God of Hosts hath a day of discomfiture, and
treading down, and perplexity, in the valley of vision; digging
down the wall, and a cry (goeth) to the mountain.

6 And Elam bare a quiver, with troops of men and horsemen,
and Kir uncovered the shield.

7 And it cometh to pass, thy choice valleys are full of chariots,
and the horsemen set themselves in array at the gate.

8 And he removed the covering of Judah, and thou didst look
in that day to the armour of the house of the forest.

9 And ye saw the breaches of the city of David, that they
were many; and ye gathered together the waters of the lower
pool

10 And ye numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses
did ye break down to fortify the wall.

11 And ye made a lake between the two walls for the water of
the old pool: but ye looked not unto him that made it, neither
had respect unto him that formed it long ago.

12 And in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping,
and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth:

13 And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen slaughtering
sheep, eating ﬂesh and drinking wine: (Let us) eat and drink; for
tomorrow we shall die.

14 And the Lord of Hosts revealed himself in mine ears: Surely
this iniquity shall not be expiated for you till ye die, saith the Lord
God of Hosts.

15 Thus saith the Lord God of Hosts, Go, get thee unto this
steward, unto Shebna which is over the house;

16 What hast thou here, and whom hast thou here, that thou hast
hewed thee out a sepulchre here? Hewing him out his sepulchre
on high, graving a habitation in the rock for him !

17 Behold, the Lord will hurl thee with the hurling of a mighty
man, and seize thee with a seizing.

18 He will roll thee, rolling up into a roll, like a ball into a far
country; there shalt thou die, and there the chariots of thy glory
shall be: thou shame of thy lord’s house.

19 And I will thrust thee from thy station, and from thine ofﬁce
shall he pull thee down.

20 And it shall be in that day, I will call my servant Eliakim,
the son of Hilkiah;

21 And I will clothe him with thy robe, and strengthen him
with thy girdle, and I will give thy authority into his hand; and
he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the
house of Judah.

22 And I will lay the key of the house of David upon his
shoulder; and he shall open, and none shall shut, and he shall
shut, and none shall open:

23 I will ﬁx him as a peg in a sure place; and he shall be
for a throne of honour to his father's house.

24 And they shall hang upon him all the honour of his father's
house, the offspring and the offshoots, all small vessels, from the
vessels of bowls and even to the vessels of jars.

25 In that day, saith the LORD of Hosts, shall the peg that is
ﬁxed in a sure place be removed, and be cut down, and fall; and
:the burden that is upon it shall be cut off; for the Lord hath
spoken it.

1 Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for it is laid waste, so that there
isno house, no entering in : from the land of Chittim it is revealed
to them.

2 Be silent, ye inhabitants of the isle: the merchants of Zidon,
that pass over the sea, replenished thee.

3 And on great waters the seed of Shihor, the harvest of the
Nile, was her revenue ; and it was the gain of nations.

4 Be thou ashamed, O Zidon ; for the sea, the stronghold of the
sea, speaketh: I have not travailed, nor brought forth, neither
have I nourished up young men, nor brought up virgins.

5 When the report cometh to Egypt, they shall be sorely pained
at the report of Tyre.

6 Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye inhabitants of the isle.

7 Is this your jubilant one? from the ancient days is her
antiquity; her feet bore her far away to sojourn.

8 Who hath ’this against Tyre, the crowning city?
whose merchants were princes, whose traffickers were the honourable
of the earth.

9 The Lord of Hosts hath purposed it, to profane the pride
of all glory, to bring into contempt all the honourable of the
earth.

10 Pass through thy land as the river, daughter of Tarshish 3
there is no girdle any more.

11 He hath stretched out his hand Over the sea, he hath disquieted
kingdoms 3 the Lord hath given commandment concerning
Canaan, to destroy the strongholds thereof.

12 And he said, Thou shalt no more be jubilant, thou outraged
virgin-daughter of Zidon 3 arise, pass over to Chittim; there also
thou shalt have no rest.

13 Behold the land of the Chaldaeans; 3 this people not:
Asshur founded it for desert creatures; they set up his (watch-)
towers, they roused up her palaces 3 he hath made her a ruin.

14 Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; 3 for your stronghold is
destroyed

15 And it shall be in that day, that Tyre shall beforgotten
seventy years, as the days of one king; from the end of seventy
years shall it be to Tyre as the song of the harlot.

16 Take a harp, go about the city, forgotten harlot; 3 do well in
playing, do much singing, that thou mayest be remembered.

17 And it shall be, from the end of seventy years, the Lord
shall visit Tyre, and she shall return to her hire, and shall play
the harlot with all the kingdoms of the earth on the face of the
ground.

18 And her gain and her hire shall be holy to the Lord:
it shall not be treasured nor stored up ; but her gain shall belong
to those that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and for
stately clothing.

XXIV. 1 Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty, and
maketh it void, and overturneth the face thereof, and scattereth
the inhabitants thereof.

2 And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with
the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her
mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender,
so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver
of usury to him.

3 The earth shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled; for
the Lord hath spoken this word.

4 The earth mourneth, fadeth ; the world languisheth, fadeth;
the highness of the people of the earth languisheth.

5 And the earth is become impious under her inhabitants; for
they have transgressed the laws, overstepped the statute, broken
the everlasting covenant.

6 Therefore hath a curse devoured the earth, and the inhabitants
of it are held guilty; therefore the inhabitants of the earth are
burned, and few men left.

7 The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth, all the
merryhearted do sigh.

8 The mirth of tabrets ceaseth, the uproar of the jubilant endeth,
the of the harp ceaseth.

9 They shall not drink wine with a song; strong drink shall be
bitter to them that drink it,

10 The city of wasteness is broken down; every house is shut
up, not to enter.

11 There is a crying in the streets for wine; all joy is grown
dark; the mirth of the land is gone.

12 There remaineth in the city desolation, and into ruin the
gate is beaten down.

13 For thus it shall be in the midst of the earth among the
peoples; as at the beating of an olive tree, as at the gleanings
when the vintage is done.

14 These shall lift up their voice, they shall sing; because of
the majesty of the Lord, they cry aloud from the sea.

15 Therefore glorify ye the Lord in the lights, the name of the
Lord God of Israel in the isles of the sea

16 From the comer of the earth have we heard songs, Honour
to the righteous. And I said, Wasting for me, wasting for me,
woe to me ! the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea,
the treacherous dealers have indeed dealt treacherously.

17 Fear, and a pit, and a snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of
the earth

18 And it shall be, he who ﬂeeth from the voice of the fear
shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh up out of the midst
of the pit shall be taken in the snare; for windows from on high
are opended, and the foundations of the earth do shake.

19 The earth is utterly broken, the earth is utterly shattered, the
earth is utterly uprooted.

20 The earth staggereth like a drunkard, and swayeth to and fro
like a but; and the rebellion thereof is heavy upon it; and it shall
fall, and not rise again.

21 And it shall be in that day, the Lord shall visit (upon) the
host of the height in the height, and the kings of the earth upon
the earth.

22 And they shall be gathered, as prisoners are gathered, into a
pit, and after many days shall they be visited.

23 And the moon shall blush, and the sun be ashamed; for
the LORD of Hosts is King in mount Zion, and before his elders
(there is) glory.

XXV. 1 O Lord, thou art my God; I will exalt thee, I will
praise thy name; for thou hast done a wonder; counsels from of
old, truth, true.

2 For thou hast made of a city a heap; a fenced town to be
a ruin; a castle of strangers to be no city; it shall not be built,
for ever.

3 Therefore shall a strong people honour thee, the city of the
terrible nations shall fear thee.

4 For thou hast been a stronghold to the poor, a stronghold to
the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from
the heat; for the blast of the terrible (ones) is as a (rain)storm
upon a wall.

5 Thou shalt subdue the uproar of strangers, like heat in a
parched land 3 (as) heat by the shadow of a cloud 3 the song of
the terrible shall be brought low.

6 And in this mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all
peoples a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat
things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined

7 And he will swallow up in this mountain the face of the
veil that veileth all peoples, and the covering that covereth all
nations.

8 He hath swallowed up death for ever; and the Lord GOD
will wipe away tears from off all faces 3 and the reproach of his
people shall he take away from 06 the earth 3 for the Lord hath
spoken it.

9 And one shall say in that day, Lo, this is our God 3 we waited
for him, and he will save us ; this is the LORD, we waited for him 3
we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation

10 For on this mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest, and
Moab shall be trampled in his place, as straw is trampled in the
water of the dung pit.

11 And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst thereof,
as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth (his hands) to swim 3 and
he shall lay low his haughtiness, together With the wiles of his
hands. ’

12 And the fortress of the high place of thy walls hath he brought
down, laid low, brought to the ground, even to the dust.

XXVI. 1 In. that day shall this song be sung in the land
of Judah: We have a city of strength; salvation will he appoint
for walls and rampart.

2 Open ye the gates, that a righteous nation which keepeth
truth may enter in.,

3 A steadfast mind thou keepest in peace, peace; because he
is secure in thee.

4 Trust ye in the LORD for ever ; for in Jah the Lord is a
Rock of Ages.

5 For he hath brought doWn the dwellers in the height, the
lofty city 3 he bringeth. it low, bringeth it low even to the earth ;
he bringeth it even to the dust.

6 The foot shall trample on it, the feet Of the afflicted, the
steps of the poor.

7 The way for the righteous is straightness; thou levellest
straight the path of the righteous.

8 Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O LORD, have we waited
for thee 3 the desire of our soul is for thy Name and thy
memorial.

9 With my soul have I desired thee in the night: yea, with
my spirit within me will I seek thee early ; for when thy judgments
are upon the earth, the inhabitants of the world learn
righteousness.

10 Let favour be shewed to the wicked, he learneth not
righteousness ; in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly,
and will not look upon the majesty of the Lord

11 Lord, thy hand is lifted up, they will not see ; they shall
see, and be ashamed at the jealousy for a people ; yea, ﬁre shall
devour thine enemies.

12 Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us ; for all our works
also hast thou wrought for us.

13 O Lord our God, otherllords beside thee have had dominion
over us 3 through thee only will we make mention of thy name.

14 Dead, they shall not live; shades, they shall not rise;
therefore hast thou visited ahd destroyed them, and made all
their memory to perish.

15 Thou hast increased, the nation, O Lord, thou hast increased
the nation; thou hast gotten thee glory; thou hast
enlarged all the borders of the land.

16 Lord, in trouble have they inquired for thee; they uttered
a whisper]; thy correction was upon them.

17 Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time
of her delivery, doth writhe, crieth out in her pangs; so were
we at thy presence, O Loan.

18 We were with child, we writhed, we brought forth as it
were wind; we wrought not salvation (for) the earth, neither have
inhabitants of the earth fallen.

19 Thy dead ones shall live, my dead body shall arise: Awake
and sing, ye that dwell in the dust; for thy dew is the dew of
lights, and the earth shall cast forth shades.

20 Go, my people, enter into thy chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee; hide thyself for a little moment, until the
indignation be passed by.

21 For behold, the Lord cometh out of his place, to visit the
iniquity of the inhabitant of the earth upon him; and the earth
shall disclose her bloodshed, and shall no more cover her slain.

XXVII. 1 In that day the lord with his hard and great
and strong sword will visit (upon) leviathan the ﬂeeing serpent,
and leviathan the coiled serpent; and he shall slay the dragon
that is in the sea.

2 In that day, a vineyard of foaming wine ; sing ye to it ;

3 I the LORD am its keeper 3 every moment I water it; lest
any hurt it, I keep it night and day.

4 Wrath have I none; who will set briers and thorns against
me in battle? I would march against it, I would burn it all
tothether

5 Or else let him lay hold of my stronghold, make peace with
me: let him make peace with me.

6 As to what cometh, Jacob shall take root, Israel shall
blossom and bud, and they shall ﬁll the face of the earth with
fruit.

7 Hath he smitten him according to thesmiting of those that
smote him 3 or is he slain according to the slaying of his slain?

8 In exact measure, by sending her away, thou contendest
with her; he driveth her away with his rough wind in the day
of the east wind.

9 Therefore by this shall the guilt of Jacob be expiated; and
this is all the fruit, taking away his sin ; when he maketh all the
stones of the altar like chalkstones dashed in pieces, the Asherim
and sun-pillars arise no more.

10 For the defenced city is solitary, an habitation deserted
and forsaken like the wilderness ; there shall the calf feed, and
there shall he lie down, and consume her branches. ’

11 In the ’withering of her boughs they shall be broken off 3
women cOme, and set them on ﬁre ; for it is not a people of
discernment: therefore he that made them hath no compassion
on them, and he that formed them sheweth them no favour.

12 And it shall be in that day, the Lord shall beat out (corn)
from the stream of the River, unto the brook of Egypt, and ye
shall be gathered one by one, Ο ye children of Israel.

13 And it shall be in that day, a great trumpet shall be blown;
and they shall come which were lost in the land of Assyria, and
the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall worship the Lord in
the holy mount at Jerusalem.

XXVIII. 1 Ah, the proud crown of the drunkards of
Ephraim, and the fading ﬂower of his glorious beauty, which is
on the head of the fat valley of them that are smitten down with
wine!

2 Behold, the Lord hath a strong and mighty One, like a storm
of hail, a tempest of destruction; like a storm of mighty overflowing
waters, he casteth it down to the ground with force.

3 The proud crown of the drunkards of Ephraim shall be
trodden with feet;

4 And the fading flower of his glorious beauty, which is on
the head of the fat valley, shall be as an early ﬁg before the
summer, which when any seeth, he swalloweth it while it is yet
in his hand.

5 In that day shall the Lord of Hosts be for a crown of beauty
and a diadem of glory unto the remnant of his people,

6 And for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth ’over the
judgment, and for might to them that turn back war at the
gate.

7 And these also have erred with wine, and are gone astray
with strong drink; priest and prophet have erred with strong
drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they are gone astray with
strong drink; they have erred. in vision, have wavered in decision.

8 For all tables are full of ﬁlthy vomit; there is no place
(left).

9 Whom will he teach knowledge? and whom will he make to
discern the message? those that are weaned from the milk,
removed from the breasts?

10 For it is precept upon precept, precept upon precept; line
upon line, line line upon line; here a little, there a little.

11 For with stamrnerings of lip and another tongue will he
speak to this people.

12 He who said to them, This is the. rest, give ye rest to the
weary ; and this is the refreshing; and they would not hear.

13 And the word of the Lord shall be unto them precept upon
precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line ; here
a little, there a little; that they may go, and stumble backward,
and be broken, and snared, and taken.

14 Therefore hear the word of the lord, ye men of scorn,
rulers of this people which is in Jerusalem.

15 Because ye have said: We have made a covenant with
death, and have made an agreement with hell; the overflowing
scourge, when it passeth through, shall not come unto us: for
we have made lies our refuge, and in falsehood have we hid
ourselves:

16 Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I am he that
hath founded in Zion a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner-,
stone of sure foundation; he that believeth shall not be in
haste.

17 And I will set judgment for a line, and righteousness for
a, plummet ; and hail sweepeth the refuge of lies, and waters
shall overflow the hiding place.

18 And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and
your agreement with hell shall not stand; the overﬂowing scourge,
when it passeth through, ye shall be for it to tread down.

19 As oft as it passeth through, it shall take you away; for
morning by morning shall it pass through, by day and by night;
and it shall be sheer vexation to discern the message.

20 For the bed is too short for stretching oneself out, and the
covering too narrow when wrapping oneself.

21 For the Lord shall rise up as (in) mount Perazim, he
shall be disquieted as (in) the valley of Gibeon, to do his deed—
strange is his deed: and to work his work—alien is his work.

22 And now deal ye not scoffingly, lest your bonds grow
strong; for a destruction and a decision have I heard from the
Lord God of Hosts, upon the whole earth.

23 Give ye ear, and hear my voice; attend, and hear my
speech.

24 Is the ploughman always ploughing, to sow? (always)
opening and harrowing his ground?

25 Doth he not, when he hath made plain the face thereof,
cast abroad fennel, and scatter cummin, and set the wheat in
rows, and barley in the appointed place, and spelt in the border
thereof?

26 And he instructeth him according to judgment; his God
teacheth him.

27 For fennel is not threshed with a sledge, nor is a cart
wheel rolled upon cummin; for fennel is beaten out with a staff,
and cummin with a rod.

28 Bread (corn) is crushed ; for not for ever is he threshing it,
and driving his cart wheel and his horses; he doth not crush it.

29 This also cometh forth from the Lord of Hosts; he
maketh counsel wonderful, he maketh wisdom great.

XXIX. 1 Ah, Ariel, Ariel, city (where) David camped! add
ye year to year; let the feasts go round.

2 And I will distress Ariel, and there shall be lamentation and
lament; and she shall be unto me as Ariel.

3 And I will encamp against thee round about, and will lay
’ siege against thee with a mound, and raise siege works against
thee :

4 And thou shalt be brought down, out of the earth shalt thou
speak, and thy speech shall come low from the dust; and thy
voice shall be as that of a ghost from the ground, and thy speech
shall chirp out of the dust.

5 And the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust,
and the multitude of the terrible ones like passing chaff; and it
shall be in a moment suddenly.

6 From the LORD of Hosts shall she be visited with thunder,
and earthquake, and great noise; whirlwind, and tempest, and
ﬂame of devouring ﬁre.

7 And as a dream, a vision of the night, shall the multitude
of all the nations be, that are arrayed against Ariel, even all that
are arrayed against her and her fortress, and distress her.

8 And it shall be as when a hungry man dreameth, and
behold, he eateth ; and he awaketh, and his SOul is empty; and
as a thirsty man dreameth, and behold, he drinketh; and he
awaketh, and behold, he is faint, and his soul craveth; so shall
all the multitude of the nations be, that are arrayed against
mount Zion.

9 Astonish yourselves, and be astonished; blind yourselves,
and be blind: they are drunken, and not with wine; they reel,
and not with strong drink.

10 For the LORD hath poured out upon you a spirit of deep
sleep, and bath closed your eyes, the prophets; and your heads,
the seers, hath he covered.

11 And the vision of it all is become unto you as the words
of the sealed writing, which they give ’ to one that knoweth
writing, saying, Read this, pray: and he saith, I cannot, for it
is sealed.

12 And the writing is given unto one that knoweth not writing,
saying, Read this, pray; and he saith, I know not writing.

13 And the Lord said, F orasmuch as this people draweth
near, honoureth me with its mouth and with its lips; and hath
removed its heart away from me; and their fear of me is a precept
of men, that is taught:

14 Therefore, behold, I am he that will again deal wonderquy
with this people, wonderfully and a wonder; and the wisdom of
its wise men shall perish, andthe discernment of its discerning
men shall hide itself.

15 Ah, they that go deep from the Lord to hide counsel
and their-works are in darkness, and they say, Who seeth us?
and Who knoweth us?

16 The perverseness of you! shall the potter be reckoned as
clay? that the thing made should say of him that made it, He
made me not! and the thing formed of him that formed it,
’ discerneth not!

17 Is it not yet but a very little while, and Lebanon shall
turn to garden-land, and the garden-land be reckoned as a
forest?

18 And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of a writing,
and the eyes of the blind shall see out of gloom and out of
darkness.

19 And the meek shall add to their. joy in the LORD, and the
poor among men shall exult in the Holy One of Israel.

20 For the terrible one is at an end, and all is overylwith the
scoffer, and that watched for iniquity are cut off .

21 That make a man offend by a word, and lay a snare for
him that convinceth in the gate; and turn aside the righteous
with emptiness.

22 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the house of
Jacob, he that redeemed Abraham 3 Not now shall Jacob be
ashamed, neither shall his face now be pale.

23 For when he seeth his children, the work of my hands, in
the midst of him, they shall count my name holy, and countholy
the Holy One of Jacob, and fear the God of Israel.

24 And they that err in spirit shall learn discernment, and they
that murmur shall receive instruction.

XXX. 1 Ah, the rebellious sons, saith the LORD, that take
counsel, and not of me ; and weave a web, and not with my spirit,
that they may add sin to sin

2 That walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my
mouth; to strengthen themselves in the stronghold of Pharaoh,
and to trust in the shadow of Egypt.

3 Therefore shall the stronghold of. Pharaoh be to yOu a shame, I
and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion.

4 For his princes are at Zoan, and his messengers have reached
Hanes.

5 All shall be. ashamed of a people · shall not profit
them, not for a help nor profit, but for a shame, and also a
reproach.

6 The burden of the beasts of the south country.
Through a land of distress and anguish, whence are the lioness
and lion, viper and ﬂying ﬁery serpent, they carry their riches
on the shoulder of young asses, and their treasures upon the
bunches of camels, to a people that shall not profit

7 And Egypt, vain and empty will be their help: therefore
I cry concerning this, Rahab are they, a sitting still.

8 Now go, write it on a tablet before them, and inscribe it in
a book, and let it be for an after day, for ever and ever:

9 For it is a rebellious people, lying sons, sons that will not
hear the law of the LORD:

10 Which say to the seers, Ye shall not see, and to them that
have vision, Have visions not of right things, speak unto us
smooth things, see delusive visions.

11 Remove you out of the way, turn aside out of the path;
make to cease from before us the Holy One of Israel.

12 Therefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel: Because ye
reject this word, and trust in oppression and crookedness, and
stay thereon;

13 Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as afalling breach,
swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometb suddenly,
in a moment.

14 And he shall break it as a ’s jar is broken, shivering
it unsparingly; and there shall not be found a sherd among the
shivered fragments thereof, to take fire. from the hearth, or to draw
water from a cistern.

15 For thus saith the Lord GOD, the Holy One of Israel: In
returning and rest shall ye be saved: in quietness and in confidence
shall be your strength; and ye were unwilling.

16 And ye said, No: for we will flee upon horses; therefore
shall ye flee; and. We will ride upon the swift; therefore shall
they that pursue you be swift.

17 one thousand from before the rebuke of one, before the
rebuke of ﬁve shall ye ﬂee, till ye be left as a mast upon the top
of a mountain, and like the ensign on the hill.

18 And therefore will the LORD wait, that he may be gracious
unto you; and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have
mercy upon you ; for the LORD is a God of judgment; happy are
all that wait for him.

19 For a people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem; thdu shalt
weep no mOre; he will surely be gracious unto thee at the voice
of thy cry ; as he heareth it, he answereth thee.

20 And the Lord shall give you the bread of affliction, and
water of oppression; and thy teachers shall not withdraw any
more, and thine eyes shall see thy teachers:

21 And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This
is the way, walk ye in it: when ye turn to the right hand, and
when ye turn to the left.

22 And ye shall defile the covering of thy graven images of
silver, and the overlaying of thy molten images of gold; thou
shalt scatter them as an unclean thing; thou shalt say unto it,
Begone!

23 And he shall give. the rain of thy seed, with which thou
shalt sow the ground; and bread, the increase of the ground, and
- it shall be rich and fat: in that day shall thy cattle feed in a
broad pasture.

24 And the oxen and. the young asses that till the ground shall
eat salted provender, winnowed with the shovel and with the fan.

25 And there shall be, upon every high mountain, and on
every uplifted hill, channels and streams of waters in the day of
the great slaughter when the towers fall.

26 And the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun,
and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven
days, in the day that the LORD bindeth up the hurt of his people,
and healeth the stroke of its wound.

27 Behold, the Name of the LORD cometh from far; burning
his anger, and denseness of rising smoke; his lips are full of
indignation, and his tongue like devouring ﬁre.

28 And his breath is as an overflowing stream, dividing even
to the neck, to shake the nations in the shaking sieve of vanity;
and a bridle that leadeth astray shall be in the jaws of peoples.

29 Your song shall be like the night When a feast is kept holy;
and joy of heart, like his that marcheth with the ﬂute, to go into
the mountain of the LORD, to the Rock of Israel.

30 And the Lord shall cause the majesty of his voice to be
heard, and the lighting down of his arm to be seen, with fury of
anger, and ﬂame of devouring ﬁre; scattering, rainstorm, and
hailstone. . ’

31 For at the voice of the Lord shall Asshur be affrighted ;
with the rod shall he smite.

32 every passing of the staff of destiny, which the Lord
shall make to light on him, shall be with tabrets and harps; and
with waving wars shall he ﬁght against her. ’

33 For a burning place is made ready from yesterday; even it
is prepared for the king; he hath made it deep, and hath made
it broad; its pile ﬁre and much wood; the breath of the Lord,
like a stream of brimstone, bumeth against it.

XXXI. 1 Ah, they that go down to Egypt for help; and.
they stay on horses, and trust in chariots, for they are many, and in
horsemen, for they are very strong; and they look not unto the
Holy One of Israel, neither. inquire of the Lord!

2 And he also is wise; and bringeth evil, and removeth not his
words; and he riseth up against the house of evil doers, and
against the help of them that work naughtiness.

3 And the Egyptians are men, and not God: and their horses
ﬂesh, and not spirit: and the Lord shall stretch out his hand, and
he that helpeth shall stumble, and he that is holpen shall fall, and
they all shall come to an end together.

4 For thus said the LORD unto me, As the lion growleth, and
the young lion over his prey, against whom a multitude of
’ shepherds is called forth: at their voice he is not affrighted, and
at their uproar he is not dismayed; so shall the LORD of Hosts
come down to ﬁght against mount Zion, and against the hill
thereof.

5 As birds hovering, so will the LORD of Hosts protect Jeru-
salem; protecting and rescuing, passing over, and setting free.

6 Return ye unto him from whom they have deeply revolted,
Ο children of Israel.

7 For in that day they shall reject every man his false gods of
silver, and his false gods of gold, which your own hands have
made you, a sin.

8 And Asshur shall fall, by the sword of no man, and the
sword, of none born of men, shall devour him; and he shall ﬂee
from before the sword, and his young men shall be for tribute.

9 And his rock shall pass away, from fear, and his princes be
frighted from the standard, saith the LORD, who hath his ﬁre in.
Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem. ’

XXXII. 1 Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and
(as) for princes, they shall rule in judgment.

2 And a man shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and a
covert from the rainstorm; as channels of water in a dry place,
as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.

3 And the eyes of them that see shall not be closed, and the
ears of them that hear shall hearken.

4 And the heart of the hasty shall have discernment to know,
and the tongue of the stammerers shall be quick to speak
clearly. ·

5 The fool shall no more be called noble, nor the mean spoken
of as liberal.

6 For the fool will speak folly, and his heart will work naughtiness,
todo impiety, and to speak error against the Lord, to empty
the soul of the hungry, and he will cause the drink of the thirsty
to fail.

7 And the means of the mean are evil; it is he that deviseth
plots to destroy the meek with words of falsehood, even when the
needy speaketh judgment.

8 But the noble deviseth noble things; and he shall stand
ﬁrm on noble things.

9 Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice: ye
conﬁdent daughters, give ear unto my speech.

10 In a year, and days over, shall ye be disquieted, ye conﬁdent
Ones ; for the vintage is at an end, the gathering shall not come.

11 Tremble, ye women that are at ease: be disquieted, ye
conﬁdent ones; strip you, and make you bare, and gird (sackcloth)
upon your loins.

12 They shall smite upon the breasts, for the pleasant ﬁelds,
for the fruitful vine.

13 Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and
briers ; yea, upon all houses of joy the exultant city.

14 For the palace is forsaken: the uproar of the city deserted;
hill and watchtower serve for caves for ever, a joy of wild asses,
a pasture of ﬂocks:

15 Until a spirit be poured out upon us from on high, and the
wilderness become a garden-land, and the garden-land be counted
for a forest.

16 And judgment shall rest in the wilderness, and righteousness.
dwell in the garden-land. -

17 And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the
effect of righteousness quietness and conﬁdence for ever.

18 And my people shall abide in a home of peace, and in
secure dwellings, and in quiet resting-places.

19 And it shall hail at the downfall of the forest; and the city
shall lie low in lowliness.

20 Happy are ye, that sow beside all waters; that send forth
the foot of the ox and the ass.

XXXIII. 1 Ah, thou that spoilest, and thyself art not
spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they have not dealt
treacherously with thee! When thou shalt cease to spoil, thou
shalt be spoiled; when thou shalt have succeeded in dealing
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.

2 O Lord, be gracious unto us; we have waited fOr thee; be
thou their arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of
trouble.

3 At the voice of the uproar the’peoples ﬂee; at the lifting up
of thyself the nations are scattered.

4 And your spoil shall be gathered as the caterpillar gathereth;
as locusts run to and fro, shall they run upon it.

5 The LORD is exalted, for he dwelleth in the height; he hath
ﬁlled Zion with judgment and righteousness.

6 And there shall be faithfulness in thy times; power of
salvation, wisdom and knowledge: the fear of the Lord, that
is his treasure. ’

7 Behold, their valiant ones cry without; the mesSengers of
peace weep bitterly.

8 The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man is ceased; he
hath broken the covenant, despised cities, not man.

9 The earth mourneth, languisheth; Lebanon is ashamed,
withereth; Sharon becometh like a desert; and Bashan and
Carmel shake off (their leaves).

10 Now will I rise, saith the LORD; now will I exalt myself;
now will I lift up myself.

11 Ye shall conceive hay, ye shall bring forth stubble; your
breath is ﬁre which shall devour you.

12 And peoples shall become burnings of lime; thorns cut up,
they shall burn in the ﬁre.

13 Hear, ye that are far, what I have done; and ye that are
near, acknowledge my might.

14 The sinners are afraid in Zion; trembling hath seized the
impious. Who among us can sojourn with deVOuring ﬁre? who
among us can sojourn with everlasting burnings?

15 He that walketh in righteousness, and speaketh upright-
ness; that rejecteth the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his
hands from taking hold on a bribe, that stoppeth his ear from
hearing of bloodshed, and closeth his eyes from seeing evil:

16 He shall inhabit heights, fortresses of rocks (are) his high
place; his bread is given him, his water is sure.

17 Thine eyes shall see a king in his beauty; they shall
behold a land of distances.

18 Thine heart shall meditate on terror. Where is he that
counted? Where he that weighed? where he that counted the
towers?

19 Thou shalt not see the stubborn people, a people too deep
of language to be heard; of a stammering tongue, there is no
discerning.

20 Look upon. Zion, the city of our appointed assembly;
thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a habitation of security, a tent
that shall not be removed; its stakes shall not be plucked up
for ever, and all its cords are unbroken.

21 But there in majesty the Lord will be for us a place of
rivers, of canals wide stretching; thereon shall go no galley with
oars, neither shall gallant ship pass thereby.

22 For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the
Lord is our king: he will save us.

23 Thy cords are loosed, they cannot ﬁrmly ﬁx their pole;
they have not spread out the banner; then was divided the prey
of plunder in abundance; lame men do spoil spoil.

24 And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick; the people
that dwelleth therein is forgiven (its) iniquity.

XXXIV. 1 Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken,
ye peoples; let the earth hear, and the fulness thereof; the world,
and all that come forth of it.

2 For the LORD hath indignation against all nations, and fury
against all their host; he hath laid them under the ban, he hath
given them to slaughter.

3 And their smitten shall be cast out, and their carcases, their
stink shall go up, and mountains shall be melted with their
blood.

4 And all the host of heaven shall waste away, and the heavens
shall be rolled up as a scroll, and all their host shall fade, as a
leaf fadeth from a vine, and as a fading (leaf) from a ﬁg tree.

5 For my sword hath drenched itself in heaven; behold, it
shall come down upon Edom, and upon the people of my ban,
for judgment.

6 The LORD hath a sword, it is ﬁlled with blood, it is made
rich with fat, with the blood of lambs and he goats, with the fat of
the kidneys of rams; for the ’LORD bath a sacrifice in Bozrah,
and a great slaughter ’the land of Edom.

7 And ’ oxen shall come down with them, and bullocks
with bulls; and their land shall be drenched with blood, and
their dust made rich with fat.

8 For the Lord hatha day of vengeance, and a year of recompense
for the quarrel of Zion.

9 And her streams shall be turned into pitch, and her dust
into brimstone; and the land thereof shall become pitch that
burneth.

10 Night and day it shall not be quenched; for ever its smoke
shall go up; from generation to generation it shall lie waste; for
ever and ever there shall be none passing through it.

11 But the pelican and the bittern shall possess it; and the
horned owl and the raven shall dwell in it; and he shall stretch
out upon it the line of wasteness and the plummet of void.

12 As for the nobles thereof, none shall be there to proclaim
the kingdom ; and all her princes shall be no more.

13 And her castles shall spring up (with) thorns; nettles and
brambles in the fortresses thereof; and it shall be a habitation
for jackals, a court for [daughters of ] ostriches.

14 And desert creatures shall meet the wolves, and the shaggy
beast shall call to his fellow; the screech owl surely shall repose
there, and ﬁnd for herself a resting-place.

15 There shall the arrowsnake make her nest, and lay, and
hatch, and gather in her shadow; there surely shall the kites be ,
brought together, each with her mate.

16 Inquire ye out of the book of the Lord, and read; none
of these is missing, none shall want her mate; for my mouth,
it hath commanded, and his spirit, it hath brought them
together.

17 And he hath cast the lot for them, and his hand hath
divided it unto them by line; they shall possess it for ever, to
generation and generation shall they dwell therein.

XXXV. 1 The wilderness and the dry place shall rejoice;
and the desert shall exult, and blossom like the narcissus.

2 It shall. blossom abundantly and exult, yea with exultation.
and singing; there shall be given to it the glory of Lebanon, the
honour of Carmel and Sharon: they shall see the glory of the
Lord, the honour of our God.

3 Strengthen ye the slack hands, and confirm the stumbling,
knees.

4 Say to the hasty of heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your
God, vengeance cometh, retribution of God; himself cometh, and
will save you.

5 Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of
the deaf shall be unstopped:

6 Then shall the lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue of
the dumb sing; for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and
streams in the desert.

7 And the burning sand shall become a pool, and the thirsty
land springs of water; in the habitation of jackals, their lair, a
court for reed and rush.

8 And a highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be
called the holy way; there shall not pass over it (any) unclean;
and his for them; and whosoever walketh in the way, and fools,
shall not go astray.

9 No lion shall be there, nor shall the (most) violent of beasts
go up thereon; it shall not be found there; and redeemed ones
shall walk (there),

10 And the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to
Zion with song, and everlasting joy upon their head 3 they shall
attain gladness and joy, and sorrow and sighing shall ﬂee away.

XXXVI. 1 And it came to pass, in the fourteenth year of
the king Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against
all the fortified cities of Judah, and took them.

2 And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to
Jerusalem to the king Hezekiah with a great army. And he took
his stand by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the
fuller's ﬁeld.

3 And there went out to him Eliakim, Hilkiah's son, which
was over the house, and Shebna the secretary, and Joah, Asaph's
son, the recorder;

4 And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say, I pray, to Hezekiah,
Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria, What trust is this
wherewith thou trustest?

5 I say, It is only a word of -the lips, counsel and strength for
war: now, in whom trustest thou, that thou rebellest against me?

6 Lo, thou trustest on this bruised reed, on Egypt; whereon if
a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh
’of Egypt to all that trust in him.

7 And if thou say to me, We trust in the LORD our God: is it
not he, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath
removed, and said to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship
before this altar?

8 And now, exchange pledges, I pray, with my lord the king of
Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able
to set for thyself riders upon them.

9 How then wilt thou turn away the face of one governor
among the least of my ’s servants, and puttest thy trust in
- Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?

10 And now is it without the LORD that I am come up against
this land to destroy it? the LORD said unto me, Go up against
this land, and destroy it.

11 And Eliakim said, and Shebna, and Joah, unto Rabshakeh,
Speak, pray, unto thy servants in the Aramaean tongue, for we
understand it: and speak not unto us in the Jewish tongue, in-the
ears of the people which are on the wall.

12 And Rabshakeh said, Is it to thy lord, and to thee, that my
lord hath sent me, to speak these words? Is it not to the men
that sit on the wall, to eat their own dung, and drink their own
water with you?

13 And Rabshakeh Stood, and cried with a great voice in the
Jewish tongue, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the ἦ
king of AsSyria

14 Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you; for he
shall not be able to deliver you. ὁ .

15 And let not Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, saying,
The LORD will safely deliver us; this city shall not be given into
the hand of the king of Assyria. ’

16 Hearken not to Hezekiah; for thus saith the king of
Assyria., Make agreement with me, and come ’out to me; and eat
ye everyone of his vine, and everyone of his ﬁg tree, and drink
ye everyone the waters of his cistern :

17 Until I come and take you away to a land like your own -
land, a land of corn and new wine, a land, of bread and vine-
yards:

18 Lest Hezekiah entice you, saying, The LORD will deliver
us. Have the gods of the nations delivered everyone his land
out of the hand of the king of Assyria?

19 Where are the gods-of Hamath and Arpad? where the ’
gods of Sepharvaim? and verily they have delivered Samaria out
’ of my hand! .

20 Who are they among all the gods of these lands, that have
’ delivered their land out of my hand? that the LORD should
deliver Jerusalem out of my hand!

21 But they ’held their peace, arid answered him not a word;
for the king’s commandment was thus, saying, Ye shall not answer ’
him. ’

22 And Eliakim came, the son of Hilkiah, that’was over the
house, and Shebna the secretary, and J-oah, the son of Asaph,
the recorder, unto Hezekiah, with clothes rent, and told him the ’
words of Rabshakeh.

XXXVII. 1 And it came to pass, when the king Hezekiah
heard it, that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth.
and went into the house of the Lord

2 And he sent Eliakim, who was over the house, and Shebna
the secretary, and the elders of the people, covered with sackcloth,
unto Isaiah the prophet, the son. of Amoz.

3 And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day is a
day of trouble, and chastisement, and contempt; for the children
are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

4 It may be the LORD thy God will hear the words of Rab-
shakeh, whom the king of Assyria his lord hath sent to reproach
the living God, and will chastise the words which the Lord thy
God hath heard; and thou wilt lift up prayer for the remnant that
is found.

5 And the servants of the king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.

6 And- Isaiah said unto them, Thus- shall ye say unto your
lord, Be not afraid of the words which thou hast heard, wherewith
the young men of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.
ᾇ Behold, I will put a spirit in him, and he shall bear a message,
and return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the
sword in his own land.

8 And Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria
waning against Libnah, for he had heard that he had broken up
from Lachish.

9 Ahd he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Cush, He
is gone forth to war against thee. And he heard, and sent
messengers to Hezekiah, saying,

10 Thus shall ye say to Hezekiah, king of Judah, saying, Let
not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive ’ saying,
Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of
Assyria.

11 Behold, thyself hast heard what the kings of Assyria have I
done to all the lands, putting them under the ban; and shalt thou
be delivered;

12 Did the gods of the nations, which my fathers destroyed,
deliver them? as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children
of Eden which were in Telassar?

13 Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and
the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena and IvvahP

14 And Hezekiah took the letter from the hand of the messengers,
and read it; and Hezekiah went up unto the house of
the LORD, and spread it before the Lord

15 And Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord saying,

16 O Lord of Hosts, God of Israel, that sittest upon the
cherubim, thou art the God, thou alone, for all the kingdoms of
the earth; thou hast made the heavens and the earth.

17 Incline thine ear, Lord, and hear; open thine eyes, O
LORD, and see; and hear all the words of Sennacherib, which he
hath sent to reproach the living God.

18 Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all
the lands, and their land,

19 And have given their gods into the ﬁre; for they were no
gods, but the work of ’s hands, wood and stone; and have
destroyed them. ’

20 And now, LORD our God, save us from his hand: and all
the kingdoms of the earth shall know that thou art the LORD,
thou alone.

21 And Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah, saying,
Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, As to what thou hast
prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria:

22 This is the word which the LORD hath spoken concerning
him: The virgin daughter of Zion hath despised thee, hath
mocked thee; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head after thee.

23 Whom hast thou reproached and reviled? and against
whom hast thou raised high thy voice? thou hast lifted up thine
eyes on high against the Holy One of Israel.

24 By the hand of thy servants thou hast reproached the
Lord, and hast said, With the multitude of my chariots I have
ascended the height of the mountains, the recesses of Lebanon;
and I will cut down the ’loftiness of his cedars, the choice of his
ﬁr-trees; and I will come into the height of his border, the forest
of his garden-land.

25 I have digged, and drunk waters; and with the sole of my
feet I will dry up all the canals of Mazor. ’

26 Hast thou not heard? from long ago I made it, from
ancient days I formed it; now have I brought it to pass, and
thou hast been (destined) to lay waste, as ruinous heaps, fortified
cities.

27 And their inhabitants were short of hand, they were dis-
mayed and ashamed: they were (as) grass of the ﬁeld, and green
’algke, grass of the hoUse tops, and a cornfield before it stands
in stalk

28 And thy down-sitting, and thy going out and thy coming
in I know, andthy rage, against me.

29 Because thy rage against me and. thy recklessness is come
up into mine ears, I will put my ring in thy nose, and my bridle
in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou
camest.

30 And this shall be the sign unto thee: ye shall eat this year
that which groweth of itself, and the second year that which
springeth of the same: and in the third year sow ye, and reap,
and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof.

31 And the escaped of the house of Judah that are left, shall
again take root downward, and bear fruit upward.

32 For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they
that escape out of mount Zion; the jealousy of the LORD of
Hosts shall do this.

33 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the king of
Assyria, He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow
there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast up a bank
against it. By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and
shall not come into this city, saith the Lord.

35 And I will protect this city, to save it, for mine own sake,
and for my servant ’s sake.

36 And the. angel ’the Lord went out, and smote in the
camp of Assyria an hundred and fourscore and five thousand:
and (men) arose earl in the morning, and behold, they were all
dead corpses.

37 And Sennacherib king of Assyria broke up, and went, and
returned, and dwelt at Nineveh.

38 And it came ’pass, as he was worshipping in the house of -
Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote
’ him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Ararat;
and Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead.

XXXVIII. 1 In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death.
And Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, came unto him, and
said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Give orders to thine house;
for thou diest, and shalt not live.

2 And Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto
the Lord,

3 And said, Ah LORD, remember, I pray thee, how that I have
walked before thee in truth and with whole heart, and have done
that which is good in thine eyes. And Hezekiah wept, a great
weeping.

4 And the word of the LORD came to Isaiah, saying,

5 Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the LORD, the God of
David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears:
behold, I am adding to thy days ﬁfteen years.

6 And I will deliver thee and this city out of the grasp of the
king of Assyria, and I will protect this city.

7 And this shall be the sign unto thee from the Lord, that the
LORD will do this thing which he hath spoken

8 Behold, I am turning the shadow of the steps, which it has
gone down on the steps. of Ahaz by the sun, ten steps back-
ward. And the sun returned ten steps, on the steps whereon it
was gone down.

9 Α writing of Hezekiah, king of Judah, when he had been
sick, and come to life from his sickness:

10 I said, In the stillness of my days I shall go into the gates
of hell; I am deprived of the residue of my years.

11 I said, I shall not see Jah, Jab in the land of the living;
Ι shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of ceasing.

12 My habitation is plucked up, and carried away from me like
a ’s tent. I have rolled up, like a weaver, my life; he ’
cutteth me off from the thrum; from day to night thou wilt make
an end of me.

13 I quieted myself till morning; as a lion, so he breaketh
all my bones; from day to night thou wilt make an end of me.

14 Like a swift, a crane, so did I chatter; I did moan like a
dove; mine eyes failed towards the height; LORD, I am
oppressed; be thou surety for me.

15 What shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself
hath done it; I shall go softly all my years, because of the
bitterness of ’my soul.

16 O Lord, by these things men live, and wholly in them is
the life of my spirit; and thou wilt recover me, and make me to
live.

17 Behold, for peace it was bitter to me, bitter; and thou hast ’
loved my soul from the pit of destruction; for thou hast cast all
my sins behind thy back. 18 For hell cannot give thee thanks, death praise thee; they
that go down to the pit cannot hope for thy truth.

19 The living, the living, he shall give thee thanks, as I do
this day; the father shall. make the sons to know concerning thy
truth.

20 The LORD (was ready) to save me; and we will play on my
stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of the
LORD.

21 And Isaiah said, They shall take a cake of ﬁgs, and apply
it to the boil, and he shall live.

22 And Hezekiah said, What sign is there, that I shall go up
to the house of the LORD? ’

XXXIX. 1 At that time Merodach Baladan, son of Baladan,
king of Babylon, sent a letter and a present to Hezekiah;
and he heard that he had been sick, and was recovered.

2 And Hezekiah was glad because of them, and shewed them
his treasure-house, the silver and the gold, and the spices, and the
ﬁne oil, and all his armoury, and all that was found among his
treasures; there was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion,
that Hezekiah showed them not.

3 Isaiah the prophet came unto king Hezekiah, and said
unto him, What said men, and whence came they unto thee?
And Hezekiah said, They came from a far country unto me, from
Babylon.

4 And he said, What have they seen in thine house? And
Hezekiah said, All that is in my house have they seen; there is
nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them.

5 And Isaiah said to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the Lord of
Hosts:

6 Behold, the days are coming, and all that is in thine house,
and that thy fathers have stored up until this day, shall be carried
to Babylon; nothing shall be left, saith the Lord

7 And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt
beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the
palace of the kings of Babylon.

8. And Hezekiah said to Isaiah, Good is the word of the Lord
which thou hast spoken. And he said, For there shall be peace
and truth in my days.

XL. 1 Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.

2 Speak ye to the heart of Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that
her warfare is ﬁlled, that her guilt is satisfied; for she hath
received of the ’s hand double fOr all her sins.

3 A voice of one crying: In the wilderness clear ye the way
of the LORD, make level in the desert a highway for our God.

4 Every ’valley shall ’ exalted, and every mountain and hill
shall be brought low; and the rugged shall become a level, and
the rough places a plain:

5 And the glory of the LORD shall be revealed, and all ﬂesh
together shall see: forthe mouth of the LORD hath spoken it.

6 A voice of one saying, Cry! land he said, What shall I cry?
All flesh is grass, and all the goodness thereof like a ﬂower of the field.

7 The grass is withered, the ﬂower faded: because the breath
of the LORD hath blown upon it; surely the people is grass.

8 The grass is withered, the ﬂower faded; but the word of our
God shall stand for ever.

9 Get thee up upon a high mountain, thou that bringest good
tidings to Zion; lift up thy voice with strength, thou that bringest
good tidings to Jerusalem; lift it up, be not afraid! say unto the
cities of Judah, Behdld your God

10 Behold, the Lord GOD will come as a strong one, his
arm ruling for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his
recompense before him.

11 He shall feed his ﬂock like a shepherd: he shall gather
the lambs with his arm, and carry (them) in his bosom: he shall
tend those that give suck.

12 Who hath measured the waters with the hollow of his hand,
and meted out the heavens with the span, and comprehended the
dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in
a balance, and the hills in scales?

13 Who hath meted out the Spirit of the Lord, and, as the
man of his counsel, made him to know;

14 With whom took he counsel, and he caused him to discern,
and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him know-
ledge, and made him to know the way of discernment?

15 Behold, nations (are) as a drop from a bucket, and are
counted as a grain on the scales: behold, he will lift up the isles
as ﬁne dust.

16 And Lebanon is not sufficient for burning, nor its beasts
sufficient for (a burnt) sacrifice.

17 All the nations are as nothing before him, and are counted
to him as of nought, and waste. ’

18 And to whom will ye liken God? and what likeness will ye
compare unto him?

19 The graven image, a craftsman melteth it, and the smelter]
’covereth it with gold, and smelteth silver chains.

20 He that is impoverished as to an offering chooseth a tree
that will not rot: he seeketh unto him a cunning craftsman, to
set up a graven image, that will not totter.

21 Do ye not know? do ye not hear? hath it not been told to
you from the beginning? have ye not discerned from the founda-
’of the earth?

22 He that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and its inhabitants
habitants are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as
ﬁne gauze, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in;

23 That giveth over chiefs to nothing; he maketh the judges
of the earth as waste.

24 Yea, they have not been planted, yea, they have not been
sown; yea, their stock hath not taken root in the earth; and he
- even bloweth upon them, and they wither, and a whirlwind taketh
’ - them away as stubble.

25 To whom then will ye liken me, and I shall be equal to
him? saith the Holy One.

26 Lift up your eyes on high, and see: who hath created
these? he who bringeth out their host by number; he calleth
them all by name, from the greatness of his might, and being
strong in power: not one is missing.

27 Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, My way
is hid from the LORD, and my judgment will pass away from my
God?

28 Hast thou not known, hast thou not heard? an everlasting
God is the LORD, the Creator of the ends of the earth; he fainteth
not, neither is—there is no searching of his—

29 Giving power to the weary; and to the powerless he in- ’
creaseth strength. ’

30 And youths faint and are weary, and young men stumble:

31 But they that wait for the LORD shall renew strength; they
’shall lift up wings like the eagles: they shall run and not be
weary, they shall walk and not faint.

XLI. 1 Keep silence before me, O isles; and the peoples
shall renew strength; let them come near, then let them speak;
let us draw near together to judgment.

2 Who raised up from the East him (whom) Righteousness
calleth to his foot; gave up nations before him, maketh him
subdue kings; giveth them as dust for his sword, as driven
stubble for his bow?

3 He pursueth them, passeth on in peace: a path he shall not
go with his feet.

4 Who hath wrought and done it? He that calleth the gene-
rations from the beginning; I the LORD am the first, and with
the last, I am he.

5 The isles have seen it, and are afraid: the ends of the earth
tremble; they have drawn near, and come. ’

6 They help everyone his neighbour; and one saith to his
brother, Be strong!

7 And the craftsman strengthened the smelter, he that smootheth
with the hammer him that smiteth the anvil, saying of the soldering,
It is good: and he fasteneth it with nails, that it should
not totter.

8 And thou, Israel my sevant, Jacob whom I have chosen;
the seed of Abraham that loved me;

9 Thou on whom I have taken hold from the ends of the
earth, and called thee from the corners thereof; and said to thee,
Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not rejected thee.

10 Behold, all they that were hot against thee shall be
ashamed and cofounded; they shall be as nought, ans shall
perish, the men of thy strife.

12 Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, the men of
thy contention; the men of thy war shall be as nought, and as
nothingess.

13 For I, the LORD thy Gid, do hold fast thy right hadn; he
that saith to thee, Fear not, I have helped thee.

14 Fear not, thou worm Jacob, ye few men of Israel; I do
help thee, saith the LORD, and the Holy One of Israel is thy
redeemer.

15 Behold, I have set thee for a threshing sledge, sharp, new,
with edges; thou shalt thresh mountains, and grind them fine,
and shalt make hills as chaff.

16 Thou shalt winnow them, and the wind shall carry them
away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them; and thou shalt exult
in the LORD, shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.

17 The afflicted and needy are seeking water, and there is
none; their tongue is parched with thirst: I the Lord will hear
them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them.

18 I will open rivers on bare heights, and fountains in the
midst of valleys; I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and
dry land springs of water.

19 I will give in the wilderness cedar, acacia, and myrtle, and
oil-tree; I will set in the desert ﬁr, plane, and larch together.

20 That they may see, and learn, and consider, and under-
stand together, that the hand of the LORD hath done this, and
the Holy One of Israel hath created it.

21 Bring near your cause, saith the LORD; bring up your
strengths, saith the King of Jacob.

22 Let them bring them up, and tell us what shall happen;
tell ye of the former things, what they be, that we may apply our
heart, and learn their issue; or make us to hear the things that
are coming.

23 Tell the things that are. to come hereafter, that, we may
learn that ye are gods; yea, do good and do evil, that we may
look around, and see (it) together.

24 Behold ye are of nought, and your work of nothingness:
an abomination is he that chooseth you.

25 I have roused up one from the north, and he came: from
the rising of the sun one that ’calleth on my name; and he shall
come upon rulers as morter, and as a ‘potter (that) treadeth clay.

26 Who hath told from the beginning, that we may know?
and from before, that we may say, It is right! Yea, there, is
nOne that telleth, yea none that maketh to be heard, yea none
that heareth your words. ’

27 First to Zion, Behold, behold them; and to Jerusalem will
I give one that bringeth good tidings.

28 And I saw, and there was no man; and among these, and
there was no counsellor, that I should ask of them, and they
should answer a word.

29 Behold, they are all vanity; their works are ’;
their molten images are wind and wasteness.

XLII. 1 Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect,
(in whom) my soul is well pleased: I have put my soul upon
him; he shall bring forth judgment to the nations.

2 He shall not cry out, nor lift up, nor make his voice heard
in the street.

3 A bruised reed shall he not break, and a dimly burning wick
shall he not quench; according to truth shall he bring forth
judgment.

4 He shall not burn dimly nor be bruised, till he (shall) set
judgment in the earth; and the isles shall wait for his law.

5 Thus saith the God, the LORD, he that created the heavens,
and stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and the
things that come forth of it; that giveth breath unto the people
upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein:

6 Ι the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will take
hold of thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant
of the people, for -a light of the nations:

7 To open blind eyes, to bring out a captivefrom prison, and
them that sit in darkness from a house of confinement

8 Iam the Lord; that is my name; and my glory will I not
give to another, and my praise to graven images.

9 The ﬁrst things, behold, they have come, andI am telling
new things; before they spring up I cause you to hear of them.

10 Sing unto the Lord a new song, his praise from the end of
the earth; ye that go down (to) the sea, and the fulness thereof;
the isles, and the inhabitants thereof.

11 Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up (their
voice): the villages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants
of Sela shout, let them cry aloud from the top of mountains.

12 They shall give honour to the Lord, and tell his praise
among the isles.

13 The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall rouse
up zeal like a man of war: he shall shout, yea, roar; he shall
do mightily against his enemies.

14 I have been silent from of old: I have been still, and
refrained myself; (now) will I cry like a travailing woman; I will
gasp and pant together.

15 I will lay waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their
herbage; and I will turn rivers to islands, and I will dry up
pools.

16 And I will make the blind walk by a way that they knew
not; I will make them tread in paths they knew not; I will turn
darkness to light before them, and uneven places into a plain.
These are the things, I will do them, and will not abandon them.

17 They are turned back; they shall be ashamed, that
trust in the graven images, that say to the molten image, Ye are
our gods.

18 Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.

19 Who is blind, but my servant, and deaf, but my messenger
whom I (shall) send? who is blind as the surrendered one, and
blind as the Lord's servant?

20 Thou hast seen many things, but thou observest Inot:
opening the ears, and he heareth not.

21 The Lord was pleased for his righteousness’ sake: he
make the law great, and make it glorious.

22 And it is a people spoiled and robbed: snared in holes all
of them, and hidden in houses of confinement; they are for
a spoil, and there is none that delivereth; a prey, and none that
saith, Restore.

23 Who among you will give ear to this? will hearken, and
hear for the time to come?

24 Who gave up Jacob for a prey, and Israel to spoilers? was
it not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? And they
would not walk in his ways, and heard not his law.

25 And be poured upon him fury, his anger, and the violence
of war; and it set him on ﬁre round about, and he knew not;
and kindled upon him, and he laid it not to heart.

XLIII. 1 And now thus saith the Lord, that created thee,
O Jacob, and that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not; for I have
redeemed thee, I have called (thee) by thy name, thou (art) mine.

2 When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee;
and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou
walkest through the ﬁre, thou shalt not be scorched, and the
ﬂame shall not kindle upon thee.

3 For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy
Saviour; I have given Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba
in thy stead.

4 Since thou art (become) precious in mine eyes, hast been
honoured, and I have loved thee; therefore I will give man in thy
stead, and people for thy life.

5 Fear not; for I am with thee: I Will bring thy seed from
the East, and gather thee from the West:

6 I will say to the North, Give up; and to the South, Keep not
back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the end of
the earth:

7 Everyone that is called by my name, and that I have created
for my glory; that I have formed, yea, have made.

8 Bring forth a blind people, and they have eyes; and deaf
ones, and they have ears.

9 All the nations are gathered together, and the peoples are
assembled: who among them will tell this, and cause us to hear
former things? let them produce their witnesses, and appear
righteous, and let them hear, and say, (It is) truth

10 Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant,
whom I have chosen; that ye may know, and believe me, and
discern that I am he; before me there was no God formed,
neither shall there be after me.

11 I, I am the Lord, and beside me is no Saviour.

12 Myself have told, and have saved, and have caused it to be
heard, and there was no stranger among you; and ye are my
witnesses, saith the Lord, and I am God.

13 Yea, from the beginning I am he: and there is none that
delivereth out of my hand: I will work, and who shall turn it
back?

14 Thus saith the Lord, your redeemer, the Holy One of
Israel: For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and will bring down
all of them as fugitives, and the Chaldaeans in the ships of their
shouting

15 I the Lord am your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your
King.

16 Thus saith the Lord, which giveth a way in the sea, and
a path in the mighty waters:

17 Which bringeth forth chariot and horse, force and warrior:
they lie down together, they shall not rise: they are quenched,
they are gone out like a wick:

18 Remember ye not the ﬁrst things, neither consider the
things of old.

19 Behold, I do a new thing; now is it springing forth; will
ye not know it? Yea, I will set a way in the wilderness, rivers in
the desert.

20 The beast of the ﬁeld shall honour. me, jackals and
(daughters of) ostriches : for I have given ’waters in the wilderness,
rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.

21 The people which 1,Ι have formed for myself, they shall
recount my praise.

22 And thou hast noi: called upon me, Jacob : for thou hast
been weary of me, O Israel.

23 Thou hast not brought me the’lambs of thy burnt offerings,
neither hast thou honoured me with tb’y sacriﬁces: I have not
caused thee to serve with a (meal) offering,nor wearied thee with .
incense.

24 Thou hast not bought me sweet cane with silver, neither
hast thou steeped me with the fat of thy sacriﬁces: only thou
hast caused me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with a
thine iniquities.

25 I, I am he that blotteth out thy rebellions for mine own
sake, and I will not remember thy sins.

26 Put me in remembrance; let us plead together: do thou
recount, that thou mayest appear righteous.

27 Thy ﬁrst father sinned, and thine interpreters rebelled ”
against me.

28 And I will profane princes of holiness, and will give up
Jacob to the ban, and Israel to reproaches.

XLIV. 1 And now hear, O Jacob my servant; and Israel,
whom I have chosen;

2 Thus saith the Lord that made thee, and formed thee from
the womb, that will help thee: Fear not, O Jacob my servant, and
(thou) Jeshurun, whom I have chosen.

3 For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and flowing
streams upon the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon them that go forth of thee.

4 And they shall spring up in the midst of the grass, as
willows by the water courses.

5 This one shall say, I am the ’s; and this shall call on
the name of Jacob; and this shall write with his hand, The Lord's
and entitle, In the name of Israel.

6 Thus saith the Lord, the King of Israel, and his redeemer,
the Lord of Hosts; I am the ﬁrst, and I, am the last; and beside
me there is no God.

7 And who, as I, shall call, and shall tell it, and state it in
order for me? since I set up the people of old time? and things
which are coming, and things which shall come, let them tell it to
them.

8 Shudder not, and fear not: have I not caused thee to hear,
from that time, and told it? and ye are my witnesses. Is there
a God beside me? and there is no Rock: I know not (any).

9 They that form a graven image are all of them waste; and
their desirable things shall not profit; and their witnesses, they
see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed.

10 Who hath formed a god, and molten a graven, image, to no
profit?

11 Behold, all his company shall be ashamed; and the craftsmen,
they are of men; they shall all be gathered together, they
shall stand up; they shall fear, they shall be ashamed together.

12 The craftsman in iron (hath) an adze, and worketh in the
coals, and formeth it with hammers, with the arm of his strehgth
moreover he is hungry, and there is no strength: he drinketh no
water, and is faint.

13 The craftsman in wood stretcheth out a line, he marketh it
with a pencil; he shapeth it with planes, and marketh it out with
the compass; and maketh it like the ﬁgure of a man, like the
beauty of mankind: to dwell in a house.

14 He will hew him down cedars, and taketh ilex and oak, and
strengtheneth for himself (one) among the trees of the forest: he
planteth a pine, and the rain maketh it great.

15 And it shall be for man for burning: and he taketh of them,
and warmeth himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea,
he fashioneth a god, and boweth himself; he maketh it a grav
image, and falleth down thereto.

16 He burneth half thereof in the ﬁre: with half thereof he
eateth ﬂesh: he roasteth roast, and is satisfied; yea, he warmeth
himself, and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen ﬁre:

17 And the remainder thereof he maketh to be a god, to be
his (graven) image 3 he falleth down unto it, and boweth himself,
and prayeth unto it, saith, Deliver me 3 for thou (art) my god.

18 They know not, and they discern not; for one hath daubed
their eyes, that they see not, and their hearts, that they
consider not.

19 And he recalleth it not to his heart, and there is no knowledge,
and no discernment to say, I have burned half of it in the
ﬁre, and also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof: I have
roasted ﬂesh and eaten it: and shall I make the residue thereof
an abomination? shall I bow myself to the produce of a tree?

20 He is a feeder on ashes; a deluded heart hath turned him
aside, and he delivereth not his soul, nor saith, Is there not a lie
in my right hand?

21 Remember these things, O Jacob; and Israel, for thou art
my servant; I have formed thee, thou art my servant: Israel,
thou shalt not be forgotten of me.

22 I have blotted out, as a mist, thy rebellions, and as
a cloud thy sins; return unto me; for I have redeemed
thee.

23 Sing, O ye heavens, for the Lord hath done it; shout, ye
lowest parts of the earth; break forth, ye mountains, into
singing; the forest, and every tree therein; for the Lord hath
redeemed Jacob, and will beautify himself in Israel.

24 Thus saith the Lord, thy redeemer, and he that formed
thee from the womb, I am the Lord, that maketh all things; that
stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth forth the earth:
who was with me?

25 That shattereth the signs of the praters, and diviners he
will madden; that tumeth wise men backward, and maketh their
knowledge foolish:

26 That setteth up the word of his servant, and fulfilleth the
counsel of his messengers: that saith to Jerusalem, She shall be
inhabited, and to the cities of Judah, They shall be built, and
I will set up the wastes thereof:

27 That saith to the deep, Be wasted, I will dry up thy
rivers:

28 That saith to Cyrus, My shepherd, and all my pleasure
shall he fulfil; 3 and saying to Jerusalem, She shall be built, and
a temple shall be founded.

XLV. 1 Thus saith the LORD to his anointed, to Cyrus, of
whose right hand I have taken hold, to bring down nations before
him, and I will loose the loins of kings, to loose before his face
two-leaved doors, and gates shall not be shut:

2 I will go before thee, and make swelling ground a
I will break in pieces doors of brass, and cut in sunder bars of
iron:

3 And I will give thee treasures of darkness, and hidden things
of secret places, that thou mayest know that I am the Lord, which
call thee by thy name, the God of Israel.

4 For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel's mine elect, therefore
I have called thee by thy name: I have named thee
honourably, and thou hast not known me.

5 I am the Lord, and there is none else: there is no God.
beside me: I have girded thee, and thou hast not known me.

6 That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from
the setting thereof, that there is none beside me. I am the Lord,
and there is none else,

7 That form light, and create darkness, that make peace, and
create evil: I am the Lord, that do all these things

8 Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour
down righteousness; let the earth open, and let them bring forth
salvation, and let her cause righteousness to spring up together:
I the Lord have created it.

9, Ah, he that. striveth with him that formed him ! a potsherd
among potsherds of the ground. Shall the clay say to the potter,
What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands!

10 Ah, he that saith unto a father, What begettest thou? or to
a woman, Wherewith travailest thou?

11 Thus saith the Lord, the Holy one of Israel, and he that
formed him; Ask me of coming things concerning my sons, and
command me concerning the work of my hands.

12 I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, my
hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I
commanded.

13 I have roused him up in righteousness, and I will level all
his ways: he shall build my city, and he shall send forthl my
captivity, not for hire, and not for a present, saith the Lord of
hosts.

14 Thus saith the Lord, The labour of Egypt, and the merchandise
of Ethiopia, and the Sabeans, men of stature, shall pass
over unto thee, and becOme thine; they shall go after thee, in
chains shall they pass over, and they shall bow down to thee, they
shall pray unto thee: Only in thee is God, and there is none else,
no God at all.

15 Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel,
Saviour.

16 They are ashamed and also confounded, all of them; the
craftsmen of idols are gone into confusion together.

17 Israel is saved in the Lord with everlasting salvation: ye
shall not be ashamed nor confounded to all eternity.

18 For thus saith the Lord that created the heavens; (he is
God:) that formed the earth, and made it: he set it in order; he
created it not a waste, he formed it to be inhabited: I am the
Lord, and there is none else.

19 I have not, spoken in secret, in a place of the land of
darkness 3 I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me, (as in)
a waste: I the Lord speak righteousness, I declare things that
are right.

20 Assemble yourselves, and come; draw near together, ye
escaped of the nations; they know not, that carry the wood of
their graven image, and pray unto a God that cannot save.

21 Declare ye, and bring near: yea, let them take counsel
together; who hath caused this to be heard from of old, hath
declared it from that time? Is it not I, the Lord? and there is
no God else beside me: a righteous God and a Saviour; there is
none except me.

22 Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth
for I am God, and there is none else.

23 I have sworn by myself, a word is gone forth from a mouth
of righteousness, and it shall not return, that unto me every knee
shall bow, every tongue shall swear.

24 Only in the Lord, saith one, have I righteousness and
strength; unto him shall one come, and all that were inflamed
against him shall be ashamed.

25 In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be held righteous,
and boast themselves.

XLVI. 1 Bel croucheth down, Nebo stoopeth; their idols
are for beast and cattle; the things ye carried are borne heavily,
a burden to the weary.

2 They stoop, they crouch together; they cannot deliver the
burden, their soul is gone into captivity.

3 Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of
the house of Israel: which are heavily borne from the womb,
which are carried from the bosom:

4 And to old age I am he, and to grey hairs I will support; I
have made, and I will carry; and I will support, and will deliver
you.

5 To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare
me, and we shall be like?

6 They that pour forth gold from the bag, and weigh silver
with the balance; they hire a goldsmith, and he maketh it a god:
they fall down, yea, they bow themselves.

7 They lift him upon the shoulder; they support him, they set
him in his place, and he standeth; he moveth not from his place;
yea, one shall cry unto him, and he shall not answer, he shall not
save him from his distress,

8 Remember this, and stand ﬁrm; recall it to mind, O ye rebels.

9 Remember the ﬁrst things of old: for I am God, and there
is none else; God, and there is none like me.

10 Declaring the after-things from the beginning, and from of
old what is not done; saying, My purpose shall stand, and I will
do all my pleasure:

11 Calling a bird of prey from the east, the man of his counsel
from a far country: yea, I have spoken, yea, I will bring it to
pass: I have purposed it, I will also do it.

12 Hearken unto me, ye stout of heart, that are far from
righteousness;

13 I bring near my righteousness: it shall not be far off, and
my salvation shall not tarry; and I will give in Zion salvation, for
Israel my glory.

XLVII. 1 Come down, and sit in the dust, O Virgin
daughter of Babylon: sit on the earth, there is no throne, O
daughter of the Chaldaeans; for thou shaltno more be (one)
they call tender and delicate.

2 Take the millstones, and grind meal; take off thy veil, lift
up thy train, uncover the leg, pass through rivers.

3 Let thy nakedness be uncovered, yea, let thy shame be seen;
I will take vengeance, and I will not meet man.

4 Our redeemer, the LORD of Hosts is his name, the Holy One
of Israel.

5 Sit in silence, and go into darkness, O daughter of the
Chaldaeans; for thou shalt no more be (one) they call lady of
kingdoms.

6 I was wroth with my people, I profaned mine inheritance,
and gave them into thy hand; thou didst shew them no mercy;
upon the aged thou didst make thy yoke exceeding heavy.

7 And thou saidst, I shall be a lady for ever: until thou didst
not lay these things to thine heart, thou didst not remember the
latter end of it.

8 And now hear this, thou given to pleasure, that sittest
securely, that sayest in thine heart, I and none else beside: I
shall not sit a widow. neither shall I know bereavement.

9 And these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one
day, bereavement, and widowhood: they shall come upon thee in
full measure, for the multitude of thy ’orceries, for the exceeding
number of thy spells.

10 And thou hast been secure in thine evil: thou hast said,
There is none that seeth me; thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it
hath turned thee aside; and thou hast said in thine heart, I, and
none else beside.

11 And evil shall come upon thee; thou shalt not know the
dawning thereof; and ruin shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be
able to avert it: and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly,
(which) thou shalt not know.

12 Stand forth, I pray, with thy spells, and with the multitude
of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth:
peradventure thou wilt be able to profit, peradventure thou wilt
strike terror.

13 Thou art wearied with the multitude of thy counsels: let
them, I pray thee, stand forth and save thee—they who
the heavens, who gaze on the stars, who make known at the new
moons—from what shall come upon

14 Behold, they are become as stubble, ﬁre hath burned them;
they shall not deliver their soul from the hand of the ﬂame; it is
no coal to be warm, ﬁre to sit before.

15 Thus are the things to thee wherein thou hast laboured:
thy traffickers from thy youth go astray everyone his own way:
there is none that saveth thee.

XLVIII. 1 Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called
by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of
Judah; which swear by the name of the LORD, and make mention
of the God of Israel, not in truth, and not in righteousness.

2 For they are called of the holy city, and lean upon the God
of Israel: the Lord of Hosts is his name.

3 I have declared the ﬁrst things from that time; and they
went forth out of my mouth, and I showed them; I wrought
suddenly, and they came to pass.

4 Because I knew that thou art hard, and thy neck is an iron
sinew, and thy brow brass:

5 Therefore I have from that time declared it to thee 3 before
it came to pass I showed it thee; lest thou shouldest say, Mine
idol hath done them, and my graven image, and my molten
image, hath commanded them.

6 Thou hast heard 3 see it all: and ye, will not ye declare it?
I have caused thee to hear new things from now, and things
reserved, and thou didst not know them. ‘

7 They are created now, and not from that time 3 and before
to-day, and thou heardest them not 3 lest thou shouldest say,-
Behold, I knew them.

8 Nay, thou hast not heard 3 nay, thou hast not known 3 nay,
from that. time thine ear opened not 3 for I knew that thou
gigs; (33:1 very treacherously, and wast‘ called a rebel from
the womb.

9 For my name’s sake I defer mine anger, and for my praise
do I refrain it for thee, that I cut thee not off.

10 Behold, I have reﬁned thee, and not as silver; I have
chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.

11 For mine own sake, for mine own sake, will I do (it) 3 for
how is it profaned? and I will not give my glory unto another.

12 Hearken unto me, Jacob, and Israel my called: I am he,
I am the ﬁrst, I also am the last.

13 Mine hand also laid the foundation of the earth, and my
’ right hand spread out the heavens; I call unto them, they will
stand up together. ·

14 All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them
declared these things? The LORD hath loved him: he will do
lgiausre on Babylon, and his arm (shall be) on the
Chaldaeans.

15 I, I, have spoken; yea, I have called him; I have brought
him, and he shall make his way prosperous.

16 Draw near unto me, hear ye this; not from the beginning
have I spoken in secret; from the time that it was, there am I
and now the Lord God, and his spirit, hath sent me.

17 Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of
Israel: I am the Lord thy God, which teacheth thee to profit.
which leadeth thee by the way thou shouldest walk.

18 O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! and
’ thy peace had been as the river, and thy righteousness as the
waves of the seal

19 And thy seed had been as the sand, and the offspring of
thy bowels like the grains thereof: his name should not be cut off
nor destroyed before me.

20 Go ye forth of Babylon, ﬂee ye from the Chaldaeans; with
a voice of singing declare ye, make this heard, send it forth to
the end of the earth; say ye, The Lord hath redeemed his
servant Jacob.

21. And they thirsted not in the deserts (where) he made them
go; he caused the waters to ﬂow out Of the rock for them; and
he clave the rock, and the waters gushed out.

22 There is no peace, saith the Lord, to the wicked.

XLIX. 1 Hearken, ye isles, to me, and listen, ye peoples,
from afar; the Lord hath called me from the. womb; from the
bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name.

2 And he made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow
of his hand he hid me; and set me for a polished arrow; in his
quiver be concealed me,

3 And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom
I will glorify myself.

4 And I said, I have laboured in vain, for waste and vanity
have I consumed my strength; surely my judgment is with the
Lord, and my recompense with my God.

5 And now, saith the Lord, that formed me from the womb
for a servant to him, to bring Jacob again to him, and that Israel
be not swept away—and I shall be honoured in the eyes of the
Lord, and my God shall be my—

6 And he said, It is too light a thing that thou shouldest be my
servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved
of Israel; and I will give thee for a light of the nations,
that my salvation may be to the end of the earth.

7 Thus saith the Lord, the redeemer of Israel, and his Holy
One, to the despised of soul, to the abhorred of a nation, to a
servant of rulers: Kings shall see and arise; princes, and they
shall bow themselves; for the sake of the LORD, that is faithful;
the Holy One of Israel, and he hath chosen thee.

8 Thus saith the Lord, In a time of favour have I answered
thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee; and I will
preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to
raise up the land, to allot the desolate allotments,

9 Saying tothe captives, Go forth; to them that are in darkness,
Show yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and on all
bare heights is their feeding place.

10 They shall not hunger nor thirst; and the burning sand
and sun shall not smite them; for he that hath mercy on them
shall lead them, and by springs of water shall he guide them.

11 And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways
shall be exalted.

12 Behold, these shall come from afar; and behold, these
from the north and from the sea; and these from the land of
Sinim.

13 Sing, O heavens, and rejoice, O earth; and break forth into,
singing, ye mountains; for the Lord hath comforted his people,
and will have mercy upon his afflicted.

14 And Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and the Lord
hath forgotten me.

15 Will a woman forget her suckling, not to have compassion
on the son of her womb? yea, these may forget, and I will not
forget thee.

16 Behold, upon both palms have I engraved thee; thy walls
are continually before me.

17 Thy sons make haste; thy destroyers and they that made
thee waste shall go forth of thee.

18 Lift up thine eyes round about, and see; they all are
gathered together, they come to thee. As I live, saith the Lord,
thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all as with an ornament,
and gird them on (thee) like a bride.

19 For (as for) thy ruins and thy waste places, and the land of
thy destruction, surely now shalt thou be too strait for the
inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.

29 The sons of thy bereavement shall yet say in thine ears,
The place is too strait for me: give place to me, and I will
dwell.

21 And thou shalt say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me
these, and I was bereaved and barren, an exile, and outcast? and
who hath nourished up these? Behold, I was left alone; these,
where were they?

22 Thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, I will lift up my hand
toward the nations, and set up my standard to the peoples; and
they shall bring thy sons in the bosom, and thy daughters shall
be carried on the shoulder,

23 And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their princesses
thy nursing mothers: they shall bow themselves to thee face to
the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know
that I am the Lord, on whom they that wait shall not be
ashamed.

24 Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the captive of
the righteous delivered?

25 For thus saith the Lord, Even the captives of the mighty
shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be
delivered, and I will contend with him that contendeth with
thee, and I will save thy children.

26 And I will make them that oppress thee to eat their own
ﬂesh, and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with
new wine; and all ﬂesh shall know that I the Lord am thy
saviour and thy redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.

L. 1 Thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your mother's
divorcement, wherewith I have put her away? Or which of my
creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your
iniquities were ye sold, and for your rebellions was your mother
put away.

2 Why came I, and there was no man? Whycalled I, and.
there was none that answered? Is my hand utterly too shortened
to redeem? and is there no power in me to deliver? Behold, at
my rebuke I will dry up the sea, I will make rivers a wilderness;
their ﬁsh stink for want of water, and die with thirst.

3 I will clothe the heavens in blackness, and make sackcloth
their covering.

4 The Lord GOD hath given me the tongue of disciples, that I
should know how to sustain the weary with a word ; he wakeneth
every morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as disciples.

5 The Lord GOD hath opened me an ear, and I resisted not,.I
drew not back.

6 I gave my back to smiters, and my cheeks to them that
plucked 96 the hair; I hid not my face from ignominies and
spitting. θ .

7 And the Lord GOD will help ‘me; therefore I am not
confounded ; therefore have I set my face like a ﬂint, and I know
that I shall not be ashamed.

8 Near is he that justiﬁeth me: who will contend with me?
let us stand forth together ; who is the master of my judgment?
let him come near to me.

9 Behold, the Lord GOD will help me; who is he that shall
condemn me? 10, they all shall wear out like a garment; the
moth shall eat them.

10 Who is among you that feareth the LORD, that hearkeneth‘
to the voice of his servant? He that walketh in darkness, and
hath no light? let him trust in the name of the Loan, and lean
ἶ upon his God.

11 Behold, all ye that kindle a ﬁre, that gird yourselves with
ﬁrebrands; walk amid the light of your ﬁre, and amid the brands
that ye have kindled. From my hand is this for you; ye shall
lie down in pain.

LI. 1 Hearken to me, ye that pursue righteousness, ye that
seek the Lord: look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to
the hole of the pit whence ye are digged.

2 Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare
you; for I called him, being one, and blessed him, and
increased him.

3 For the Lord hath comforted Zion; he hath comforted all
her waste places; and he hath made her wilderness like Eden,
and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness
shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of song.

4 Listen unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my
nation; for a law shall go forth from me, and I will settle my
judgment for a light of the peoples.

5 My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and
mine arms shall, judge the peoples; the isles shall wait for me,
and on mine arm shall they trust.

6 Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth
beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the
earth shall wear out like a garment, and they that dwell therein
shall die as in like manner; but my salvation shall be for ever,
and my righteousness shall not be dismayed.

7 Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, ’a people in
whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of (weak) men,
and be ye not dismayed at their revilings.

8 For the moth shall eat them like a garment, and the worm
shall eat them like wool; but my righteousness shall be for ever,
and my salvation from generation to generation.

9 Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake
as in the ancient days, the generations of old. Art thou not it
that hewed Rahab in pieces, that pierced the dragon?

10 Art thou not it that dried up the sea, the waters of the
great deep; that made the depths of the sea a way for the redeemed
to pass over?

11 And the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to
Zion with song, and everlasting joy upon their head; they shall
attain gladness and joy, and sorrow and sighing are ﬂed away.

12 I, I, (am) he that Comforteth you; who artthou, that thou
fearest (weak) man that shall die, and the son of man that shall
be made as grass;

13 And hast forgotten the Lord thy maker, that stretched out
the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth? and hast
trembled continually all the day before the fury of the oppressor,
as he made ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the
oppressor ?

14 He that is bowed down hasteneth to be loosed, and shall
not die in the pit, nor shall his bread fail.

15 And Ipam the Lord thy God, that stirreth up the sea, and
its waves roared; the Lord of Hosts is his name.

16 put my words in thy mouth, and with the shadow
of my hand have. I covered thee, to plant the heavens, and to
lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art
my people.

17 Wake, wake thee up, arise, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk
at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken
the bowl of the cup of bewilderment, thou hast drained it out.

18 There is no guide for her among all the sons that she hath
brought forth, neither is there any, that taketh hold of her hand
of all the sons that she bought up.

19 These two things are come upon thee: who will mourn
with thee? wasting and destruction, and the famine and the
sword: how shall I comfort thee?

20 Thy sons have fainted: they lie at the head of all the
streets, like an antelope in a net; they that are ﬁlled with the
fury of the LORD, the rebuke of thy God.

21 Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, and
not with wine:

22 Thus saith thy Lord, the Lord, and thy God, that pleadeth
the cause of his people, Behold, I take out of thine hand the
cup of bewilderment, the bowl of the cup of my fury; thou shalt
no more drink it again:

23 And I will putit into the hand of thy tormentors; which
said to thy soul, Bow down, and we will pass over; and thou
didst set thy back as the earth, and as the street, to them that
passed over.

LII. 1 Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion! Put
on thy garments of beauty, O Jerusalem, holy city: for there
shall no more come into thee again the uncircumcised and the
unclean.

2 Shake thyself from the dust: arise, sit, Jerusalem! the
bands of thy neck are loosed, O Captive daughter of Zion‘. ’

3 For thus saith the LORD, .Ye were sold for nought; and not
with silver shall ye be redeemed.

4 For thus saith the Lord GOD, My people went down into
Egypt at the ﬁrst to sojourn there; and Asshur oppressed them
without cause.

5 And now, what have I here, saith the LORD, that my peopl
is taken away for nought? they that rule over him howl, saith the
LORD ; and my name continually all the day is despised.

6 I‘herefore my people shall know my name; therefore (they
shall know) in that day that I am he that doth speak: Here
am L

7 How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
bringeth glad tidings, that causeth peace to be heard ; that
bringeth glad tidings of good, that causeth salvation to be heard;
that saith unto Zion, Thy God doth reign

8 The voice of thy watchmen! they liﬂ: up the voice, they -
sing together; for they shall see eye to eye, at the LoitD’s
return to Zion. ·

9 Break forth, sing together, y’e wastes of .Jerusalem: for the
LORD hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem.

10 The LORD hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of. ’
all the nations; and all the ends of the earth have seen the
salvation of our God.

11 Depart ye, depart ye, go ye. out from thence, touch not.
what is unclean; goye out of the midst of her; purify your-
- selves, ye that bear the vessels of the LORD.

12 For ye shall not go out in haste, nor go in ﬂight: for the
Lord goeth before you, and the God of Israel is your rereward.

13 Behold, my servant shall deal wisely, he shall be high, and
lifted up, and exalted exceedingly.

14 Like as many were appalled at thee; his sightliness was
so marred from (that of) a man, and his form from (that of)
the sons of men: ’

15 So shall he sprinkle many nations; kingsshall shut their
mouths because of him; for that which was not recounted to
them shall they see, and that which they heard not shall they
discern.

LIII. 1 Who hath believed our message? and the arm of
the Lord, to whom was it revealed?

2 And he grew up before him as a sapling, and as a root
out of a dry ground: he had no form nor majesty; and we saw
him, and there was no sightliness, that we should desire him.

3 Despised and avoided of men; a man of pains, and one
that knew sickness; and as one from whom faces are hid despised,
and we esteemed him not.

4 Surely he bore- our sicknesses; and our pains, he supported
them; and we, (on our part,) did esteem him stricken, smitten
of God, and afflicted.

5 And he was pierced for our rebellions, bruised for our
iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and
in his stripes was there healing for us.

6 All we like sheep did go astray; we turned every one to
his own way; and the lord made to fall upon him the iniquity
of us all.

7 He was oppressed, and he humbled himself, and opened
not his mouth; as a lamb (that) is led to the slaughter, and
as a sheep (that) is dumb before her shearers; and he opened
not his mouth.

8 From restraint and from judgment he was taken away;
and as for his generation, who considereth, that he was cut off
out of the land of the living? for the rebellion of my people
was he stricken.

9 And one appointed his grave with wicked men, and with
a rich man in his death; because he had done no violence, and
there was no deceit in his mouth.

10 And the LORD was pleased to bruise him; he laid sickness
on him; if his soul should make a guilt-offering, he should see
a seed, he should prolong days, and the pleasure of the Lord
should prosper in his hand.

11 Out of the travail of his. soul he shall see, he shall be
satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant make
many righteous; for he will bear their iniquities.

12 Therefore will I give him part among the many, and he
shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he poured out
his soul unto death; and he was numbered with the rebellious;
and himself bare the sin of many, and made intercession for
the rebellious.

LIV. 1 Sing, Ο barren, that didst not bear; break forth
into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail; for more
are the children of the desolate than the children of the married
wife, saith the Lord.

2 Widen the place of. thy tent, and let them stretch forth the
curtains of thy habitation; withhold not; lengthen thy cords,
and strengthen thy stakes:

3 For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the
left; ’thy seed shall possess nations, and make desolate.
nations to be inhabited.

4 Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed; and be not confounded,
for thou shalt not blush; for thou shalt forget the
shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of
thy widowhood any more.

5 For thy husband is thy Maker; the LORD of Hosts is his
name; and thy Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel: the God
of the whole earth shall he be called.

6 For the LORD hath called thee as a wife forsaken and
grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when she is rejected, saith
ᾖ thy God.

7 For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great
- mercies I gather thee.

8 In a gush of wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment;
and with everlasting lovingkindness will I have mercy on thee;
saith the LORD thy Redeemer.

9 For this is the waters of Noah unto me; as I have sworn
i that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth;
so have I sworn that I will not be wrbth with thee, nor re?
buke thee

10 For the mountains shall remove, and the hills totter; yet
my lovingkindness shall not remove from thee, nor my covenant
of peace totter, saith he that hath mercy on thee, the Lord.

11 Ο thou afficted, tossed with tempest, not comforted ;
behold I lay thy stones in antimony, and thy foundations with
sapphires.

12 And I will make thy battlements rubies, and thy gates. to
be ﬁery stones, and all thy border stones of pleasure.

13 And all thy sons shall be disciples of the LORD, andgreat
shallbe the peace of thy sons.

14 In righteousness shalt thou be established; be thou far
from oppression, for thou shalt not fear, and from destruction,
for it shall not come near thee.

15 Behold, they surely gather together; it is not of me; who
gathereth against thee? he shall fall because of thee.

16 Behold, I have created the craftsman, that bloweth on the
ﬁre of coals, and that bringeth forth a weapon for its work; and
Ι have created the waster to destroy.

17 No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and
every tongue (that) shall rise up against thee in judgment thou
shalt convict. This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD,
and their righteousness from me, saith the Lord.

LV. 1 Ah, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters,
and he that hath no silver; come ye, buy and eat: and come, buy
wine and milk, for no silver and for no price.

2 Wherefore do ye weigh silver for no bread, and your earnings
for that which is not to satisfy? hearken, (only) hearken
unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight
itself in fatness.

3 Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul
shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you;
the faithful lovingkindnesses of David.

4 Behold, I have given him for a witness of peoples, a chief
and commander of peoples.

5 Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and
a nationthat knoweth not thee shall run unto thee; for the sake
of the LORD thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel; for he
hath gloriﬁed thee.

6 Seek ye the LORD while he may be found, call ye upon him
while he is near.

7 Let the wicked forsake his way, and the man of iniquity his
thoughts; and let him return unto the LORD, and he will have
mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon.

8 For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your
ways my ways, saith the LORD.

9 “For (as) the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my
ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your
thoughts.

10 For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven,
and returneth not thither, unless it have watered the earth, and
made it bringtforth and sprout, and given seed to the sower,
and bread to the eater:

11 So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth;
it shall not return unto me void, unless it have accomplished that
which I please, and made to prosper thatfor which I sent it.

12 For ye shall go forth with joy, and be led in peace; the
mountains and the hills shall break forth before you [into singing,
and all the trees of the ﬁeld shall clap the hand.

13 Instead of the thorn shall come up the ﬁr tree, and
instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree; and it shall
be to the LORD for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall
not be cut off.

LVI. 1 Thus saith the LORD, Keep ye judgment, and. do
righteousness 3 for my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness
to be revealed.

2 Happy is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that
boldeth fast by it; that keepeth the sabbath, not to profane it,
and keepeth his hand, not to do any evil.

3 And let not the alien, that hath joined himself to the LORD,
speak, saying, The LORD will surely separate me from his people;
and let not the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree.

4 For thus saith the LORD unto the eunuchs that keep my
sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and hold fast
by my covenant:

5 I Will even give unto them in my house and within my walls
a memorial and a name better than sons and daughters; I will
give him an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.

6 And the aliens, that have joined themselves to the LORD,
to minister unto him, and to love the name of the LORD, to be
his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath, not to profane it,
and boldeth fast by my covenant :

7 Them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them
joyful in my house of prayer; their burnt offerings and their
sacrifices (shall be) acceptable upon mine altar; for mine house
’ shall be called a house of prayer for all the peoples.

8 Saith the Lord GOD which gathereth the outcasts of Israel,
Yet I gather (more) unto him, to his gathered ones.

9 All ye beasts of the ﬁeld, come to devour; all beasts of
the forest.

10 His watchmen are blind, they know not, all of them; they
are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; dreaming, lying down,
loving to slumber.

11 And the dogs are strong of soul, they know not satiety;
and they, the shepherds, know not how to discern; they are all
turned to their own. way, every one to his gain, from the
furthest end of it.

12 Come ye, I will fetch wine, and we will ﬁll ourselves with
strong drink; and to-morrow shall be as this day, very exceeding
great.

LVII. 1 The. righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to
heart; and men of lovingkindness are taken away, none considering
that the righteous is taken away from the face of the
evil.

2 He entereth into peace; they rest on their beds, whoso
walketh straight forward.

3 And ye, draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, seed of
an adulterer and a whore.

4 At whom do ye make sport? at whom widen ye the mouth,
and lengthen the tongue? Are ye not children of rebellion,
a seed of falsehood?

5 Inflaming yourselves among the terebinths; under every
green tree; slaying the children in the torrent-valleys under the
clefts of the rocks.

6 Among the smooth (stones) of the torrent-valley is thy
portion; they, they are thy lot; even to them hast thou poured
out a drink-offering, thou hast offered a meat-offering. Shall
I relent for these things?

7 Upon a mountain exalted and lifted up hast thou set thy
bed; even there hast thou gone up to offer sacrifice.

8 And behind the door and the post hast thou set thy
memorial; for away from me hast thou uncovered, and gone up,
hast enlarged thy bed, and gotten thee a covenant from them;
thou hast loved their bed, hast looked on a hand.

9 And thou hast travelled to the king with oil, and hast
multiplied thy perfumes, and hast sent thine envoys far off, and
hast brought (thyself )1 down, even to hell.

10 Thou hast wearied thyself with the abundance of thy
travel; thou saidst not, It is hopeless; thou hast found revival
of thy strength; therefore thou wast not faint.

11 And of whom hast thou been afraid, and feared, that thou
shouldest lie, and hast not remembered me, hast not laid it to
thine heart? Have I not held my peace, and that from of old,
and thou fearest not me?

12 I will declare thy righteousness; and thy works, and they
shall not profit thee.

13 When thou criest, let thy gatherings deliver thee; and
a wind shall lift them all up, a breath shall take them away;
and he that trusteth in me shall inherit the land, and shall.
possess my holy mountain:

14 And (one) saith, Cast up, cast up, clear a. way; take up
the stumbling block out of the way of my people.

15 For thus saith he. that is high and lifted up, that dwelleth
for ever, and. holy 15 ms name ; I dwell in the high andholy
place, and with him that is crushed and humble of spirit, to
revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the
crushed ones.

16 For I will not contend forever, and not always I be,
wroth; for the spirit would fail from before me, and the souls
which I have made.

17 For the iniquity of his gain was I wroth, and smote him
I hid myself and was ’wroth, and he wenton perversely in the
way of his heart.

18 I have seen his ways, and I will heal him; and I will lead
him, and requite with comfort him and his mourners;

19 Creating fruit of the lips, Peace, peace, to the far off and
the near, saith the LORD, and I will heal him.

20 And the wicked are like the stirred up sea; for it cannot.
rest, and its waters stir up mire and

21 There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.

LVIII. 1 Cry with the throat, withhold not, raise thy voice
like a trumpet, and tell my people their rebellion, and the house
of Jacob their sins. ’

2 And (yet) they inquire of me day by day, and take pleasure
in the knowledge of my, ways; as a nation that hath done
righteousness, and not forsaken the judgment of its God; they
ask of me the judgments of righteousness; they take pleasure
in drawing near to God.

3 Wherefore have we fasted, and thou seest not? afflited our
soul, and thou knowest not? Behold, in the day of your fast
ye ﬁnd pleasure, and exact all your tasks.

4 Behold, ye fast for contention and quarrel, and to smite
with the ﬁst of wickedness; ye shall not fast as to-day, to make
your voice to be heard on high.

5 Shall such be the fast I will choose? a day of man's afflicting
his soul? is it to bow down his head like a bulrush, and
spread out sackcloth and ashes (as a bed)? Wilt thou call this
a fast, and an acceptable day to the-LORD?

6 Is not this the fast that I will choose? to loose the bands
of wickedness, to undo the thongs of the yoke, and to let the
crushed go free, and that ye should break every yoke?

7 Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou
bring afflicted outcasts home? when thou seest the naked, that
thou cover him, and hide not thyself from thine own ﬂesh?

8 Then shall thy light break forth as the dawn, and thy healing
shall spring up speedily; and thy righteousness shall go before
thee, the glory of the LORD shall be thy rereward.

9 Then shalt thou call, and the LORD shall answer; thou
shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am. If thou remove from
the midst of thee the yoke, the pointing of the ﬁnger, and speaking
iniquity:

10 And furnish thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted
soul ; then shall thy light arise in the darkness, and thy gloom
be as the noonday:

11 And the LORD shall lead thee perpetually, and satisfy thy
soul in dry places, and make strong thy bones: and thou shalt
be like a watered garden, ahd like a spring of water whose
waters fail not.

12 And they that are of thee shall build up ruins of old
time: thou shalt raise up the foundations of generation upon
generation; and thou shalt be called Repairer of the breach,
Restorer of paths to dwell in.

13 If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, as to doing
thy pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight,
the holy (day) of the LORD honourable; and honour it, not
doing thine own ways, not ﬁnding thine own pleasure, nor
speaking words:

14 Then shalt thou have thy delight in the LORD; and I will
cause thee to ride upon the heights of the earth, and to eat
the heritage of Jacob thy father; for the mouth of the LORD
hath spoken it.

LIX. 1 Behold, the ’S hand is not shortened, that it
cannot save ; neither his ear grown heavy, that it cannot hear:

2 But your iniquities have been separating between you and
your God, and your sins have hidden the Face from you, that
he hear not.

3 For your hands are defiled with blood, and your ﬁngers
with iniquity; your lips have spoken falsehood, your tongue will
mutter wickedness.

4 There is none that sueth in righteousness, and none that
pleadeth in truth; they trust in emptiness, and speak vanity;
they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity.

5 They hatch ’s eggs, and weave spider's webs; he that
eateth of their eggs shall die, and that which is crushed, it
hatcheth out into an adder.

6 Their webs shall not serve for a garment, neither shall they
cover themselves with their works; their works are works of
iniquity, and the practice of violence is in their hands.

7 Their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed innocent
blood; their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and destruction
are in their highways.

8 The way of peace they know not, and there is no judgment
in their tracks; they have made them their paths crooked; whosoever
goeth therein knoweth not peace.

9 Therefore is judgment far from us, neither doth righteousness
overtake us; we wait for light, and behold darkness; for
brightness,—we walk in

10 We grope along the wall like blind men, and we grope as
men without eyes; we have stumbled at noonday as in the dusk;
among the vigorous as the dead.

11 We all groan like bears, and moan piteously like doves;
we wait for judgment, and there is none; for salvation, it is
far off from us.

12 For our rebellions are multiplied before thee, and our sins
testify against us; for our rebellions are with us, and our
iniquities, we know them:

13 Rebelling and denying the LORD, and drawing back from
following our God: speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving
and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.

14 And judgment is driven backward, and righteousness
standeth afar off; for truth hath stumbled in the broad place,
and uprightness cannot enter.

15 And truth is (found) missing, and he that removeth from
evil maketh himself a prey; and the LORD saw it, and it was
evil in his eyes that there was no judgment.

16 And he saw that there was no man, and was amazed that
there was none that interposed; therefore his own arm wrought
salvation for him, and his righteousness, it upheld him.

17 And he put on righteousness as a coat of mail, and a
helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on garments
of vengeance for clothing, and wrapped himself in jealousy as
a cloke.

18 According to their deeds, accordingly will he requite, fury
to his adversaries, recompense to his enemies; to the isles he
will requite recompense.

19 And they shall fear the name of the LORD from the setting,
and his glory from the rising of the sun; for he shall come as
a pent-up stream, which the breath of the LORD driveth.

20 And a redeemer shall come to Zion, and to them that turn
from rebellion in Jacob, saith the LORD.

21 And as for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the
LORD; my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words that I have
put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out
of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's
seed, saith the LORD, from henceforth and for ever.

LX. 1 Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of
the LORD hath risen upon thee.

2 For behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and deep
gloom the peoples; but the LORD shall rise upon thee, and his
glory shall appear upon thee.

3 And nations shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness
of thy rising.

4 Lift up thine eyes round about, and see; they are all
gathered, they come to thee; thy sons shall come from far, and
thy daughters shall be carried on the side.

5 Then thou shalt see, and be bright, and thy heart shall
throb, and be enlarged; for the abundance of the sea shall turn
unto thee, the wealth of nations shall come to thee.

6 A stream of camels shall cover thee, young camels of
Midian and Ephah; all of them shall come from Sheba, they
shall bear gold and incense, and they shall tell tidings of the
praises of the LORD.

7 All the ﬂocks of Kedar shall gather together unto thee, the
rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee; they shall go up
with acceptance on mine altar, and I will beautify the house of
my beauty.

8 Who are these that ﬂy as a cloud, and as doves to their
lattices?

9 Surely the isles are waiting for me, and the ships of Tarshish
ﬁrst, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with
them, unto the name of the LORD thy God, and to the Holy
One of Israel; for he hath beautified thee.

10 And aliens shall build thy walls, and their kings shall
minister unto thee; for in my wrath I smote thee, and in my
favour have I had mercy upon thee.

11 And thy gates shall be open continually; they shall not
be shut, day and night; to bring unto thee the wealth of nations,
and their kings led along;

12 For the nation and the kingdom that will not serve thee
shall perish; and the nations shall be utterly wasted.

13 The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the ﬁr tree,
the plane tree and the larch together, to beautify the place
of my sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet
honourable.

14 And the sons of them that afflicted thee shall go unto
thee, bowing down; and all they that scorned thee shall bow
themselves to the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee the
City of the LORD, Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

15 Instead of thy being forsaken and hated, and none passing
through thee; I will set thee for an everlasting pride, a gladness
of generation upon generation.

16 And thou shalt suck the milk of nations, and shalt suck
the breast of kings; and thou shalt know that I the LORD am thy
Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob.

17 Instead of brass I will bring gold, and instead of iron
I will bring silver, and instead of wood brass, and instead of
stones iron; and I will make thy government peace, and thine
overseers righteousness.

18 Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor
destruction in thy borders; and thou shalt call thy walls Salvation,
and thy gates Praise.

19 The sun shall no more be thy light by day; and as for
shining, the moon shall not give light to thee; and the LORD
shall be to thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy beauty.

20 Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon
withdraw itself; for the LORD shall be to thee an everlasting
light, and the days of thy mourning shall be fulfilled

21 And thy people shall be all of them righteous; they shall
possess the land for ever; the shoot of my planting, the work
of my hands, that I may beautify myself.

22 The smallest shall become a thousand, and the least a strong
nation; I the LORD will hasten it in its time.

LXI. 1 The spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me; because
the LORD hath anointed me to bring glad tidings unto the
afflicted; hath sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim
liberty to captives, and opening of eyes to the bound:

2 To proclaim a year of acceptance for the LORD, and a day
of vengeance for our God; to comfort all mourners

3 To appoint for the mourners of Zion, to give unto them.
a garland instead of ashes, the Oil of gladness instead Of mourning,
a garment of praise instead of a faint spirit; and they shall
be called oaks of righteousness, the planting of the LORD, that
he may beautify himself.

4 And they shall build up ruins of old time; they shall raise
up desolations of the ﬁrst days; and they shall restore ruined
cities, desolations of generation upon generation.

5 And strangers shall stand and feed your ﬂocks, and aliens
shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers.

6 And ye shall be called the Priests of the LORD; men shall
say of you, The Ministers of our God; ye shall eat the wealth
of nations, and in their glory shall ye boast.

7 Instead of your shame, (ye shall have) twofold; and as for
confusion, they shall sing of their portion; therefore in their
land they shall possess twofold; everlasting joy shall be unto them

8 For I the LORD love judgment, I hate robbery with injustice;
and I will give them their earnings with truth, and I will
make an everlasting covenant with them.

9 And their seed shall be known among the nations, and their
offspring among the peoples; all that see them shall acknowledge
them, that they are a seed which the LORD hath blessed.

10 I will greatly rejoice in the LORD, my soul shall exult in
my God; for he hath put on me garments of salvation, he hath
wrapped me in a cloke of righteousness, as a bridegroom putteth
on priestly garland, and as a bride doth don her jewels.

11 For as the earth which putteth forth her sprout, and as
a garden which causeth its plants to sprout, so the Lord GOD
will cause righteousness and praise to sprout forth before all
the nations.

LXII. 1 For Zion's sake I will not hold my peace, and
for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until her righteousness go
forth as a shining, and her salvation as a torch that burneth.

2 And nations shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy
glory; and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth
of the LORD shall pronounce.

3 And thou shalt be a crown of beauty in the hand of the
LORD, and a diadem of kingship in the open hand of thy God.

4 Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy
land be any more termed Desolation; for thou shalt be called
My delight in her, and thy land Married: for the LORD delighteth
in thee, and thy land shall be married.

5 For (as) a young man marrieth a virgin, thy sons shall marry
thee; and with the rejoicing of a bridegroom over a bride, thy
God shall rejoice over thee.

6 Ι have set watchmen upon thy walls, Jerusalem; all the
day and all the night continually they shall not hold their peace.
Ye remembrancers of the LORD, no rest for you,

7 And give no rest to him, until he establish, and until he set
Jerusalem (as) a praise in the earth.

8 The LORD hath sworn by his right hand, and by the arm
of his strength, Surely I will no more give thy corn (as) food to
thine enemies; and aliens shall not drink thy new wine, at which
thou hast laboured

9 For they that have gathered it shall eat it, and praise the
LORD; and they that have stored it shall drink it in my holy
courts.

10 Pass through, pass through at the gates; clear ye the
people's way; cast up, cast up the highway; clear it of stones;
lift up a banner over the peoples.

11 Behold, the LORD hath caused it to be heard unto the end
of the earth, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation
cometh; behold, his hire is with him, and his recompence
before him.

12 And they shall call them The holy people, the redeemed
of the LORD; and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not
forsaken.

LXIII. 1 Who is this that cometh from Edom, with bright
red garments from Bozrah? this, that is glorious in his raiment,
swaying in the mightiness of his strength? I, that speak in
righteousness, mighty to save.

2 Wherefore is there red upon thy raiment, and thy garments
like one that treadeth in a winepress?

3 Ι have trodden the wine trough alone, and of the peoples
there was not a man with me; and I trode them in mine anger,
and trampled them in my fury; and their life blood was sprinkled
on my garments, and I have stained all my raiment.

4 For a day of vengeance is in my heart, and the year of my
redeemed ones is come.

5 And I looked, and there was none that helped; and I was
amazed, and there was none that supported; and mine own arm
wrought salvation for me, and my fury, it supported me.

6 Ahd I trampled the people in mine anger, and made them
drunk in my fury, and brought down their life blood to the earth.

7 I will recall the lovingkindnesses of the LORD, the praises
of the LORD, according to all that the LORD hath recompensed
to us, and the abundance of good toward the house of Israel
which he hath recompensed to them, according to his mercies,
and according to the abundance of his lovingkindnesses.

8 And he said, Only they are my people, sons that will not
deal falsely; and he became their Saviour.

9 In all their distress he was distressed, and the angel of his
Face saved them; in his love and in his forbearance he re
deemed them; and be lifted them up, and carried them all the
days of old.

10 And they rebelled and grieved his holy Spirit; and he
turned to be their enemy, and himself fought against them.

11 And he remembered the days of old, Moses, his people;
Where is he that brought them up out of the sea, with the
shepherd of his ﬂock? Where is he that put his holy Spirit
within him?

12 That caused his glorious arm to go at the right hand of
Moses, dividing the waters before them, to make himself an
everlasting name?

13 That caused them to go through the deeps, like a horse
in the wilderness, without stumbling?

14 As a beast goeth down ’the valley, the Spirit of the
LORD brought him to rest; so didst thou lead thy people, to
make thyself a name of beauty.

15 Look from heaven, and see from the habitation of thy
holiness and thy beauty: where is thy jealousy, and thy mighty
acts? the sounding of thy bowels and thy mercies are restrained
towards me.

16 For thou art our father; for Abraham knoweth us not,
Israel doth not recognize us: thy name is Our Redeemer from
of old.

17 Why dost thou make us stray, O LORD, from thy ways,
and harden our heart from fearing thee? Return, for thy servants'
sake, the tribes of thine inheritance.

18 Thy holy people have possessed for a little while; our
adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.

19 We are become as they over whom thou never barest
rule, upon whom thy name was not called.

LXIV. 1 O that thou hadst rent the heavens, that thou
hadst come down, that the mountains had quaked at thy
Presence!

2 As when kindleth brushwood, (as) ﬁre maketh water
boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, (that) nations
should tremble at thy presence,

3 While thou didst terrible things (which) we hoped not for;
that thou hadst come down, the mountains had quaked at thy
presence!

4 And from old they have not heard, have not perceived by
the ear, eye hath not seen a God beside thee, who will work for
him that waiteth for him.

5 Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness
in thy ways they will remember thee; behold, thou wast wroth,
and we sinned; in them (have we been) long time, and shall we
be saved?

6 And we are all become as one unclean, and all our
righteousnesses as a polluted garment; and we are all withered
as the leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, will take us away.

7 And there is none that calleth upon thy name, that rouseth
himself to hold fast by thee: for thou hast hid thy face from us,
and melted us by the hand of our iniquities.

8 And now, LORD, thou art our father; we are the clay, and
thou our potter; and we all are the work of thy hand.

9 Be not wroth, O LORD, to the uttermost, and remember not
iniquity for ever; behold, look, we beseech thee, we are all of
us thy people.

10 Thy holy cities are become wilderness, Zion is become
a wildemess, Jerusalem a desolation.

11 Our house of holiness and beauty, (in) which our fathers
praised thee, is burned up with ﬁre, and all our desirable things
are laid waste.

12 Wilt thou, for all this, refrain thyself, O LORD? wilt thou
hold thy peace, and affict us to the uttermost ?

LXV. 1 I was to be inquired of by them that asked not,
have let myself be found by them that sought me not; I said,
Here am I, Here am I, unto a nation that was not called by
my name.

2 I have spread out my hands all the day unto a refractory
people, which walk in a way which is not good, after their own
thoughts.

3 The people that irritate me continually to my face; which
sacrifice in the gardens, and burn incense upon the bricks:

4 Which sit in the graves, and lodge in guarded places, which
eat swine's ﬂesh, and broth of abominations is in their vessels:

5 Which say, Keep to thyself, come not near to me; for I am
holy to thee. These are a smoke in my nose, a ﬁre that burneth
all the day.

6 Behold, it is written before me: I will not hold my peace,
unless I requite, and I will requite into their bosom,

7 Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together,
saith the LORD; which burned incense on the mountains, and
reproached me upon the hills: and I will measure their recompense
ﬁrst into their bosom.

8 Thus saith the LORD, As when the new wine is found in
the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it;
so will I do for my servants’ sake, not to destroy the whole.

9 And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of
Judah a possessor of my mountains; and my chosen ones shall
possess it, and my servants shall (go to) dwell there.

10 And Sharon shall become a home for ﬂocks, and the valley
of Achor a resting place for oxen, for my people that have
inquired of me.

11 And as for you, that forsake the LORD, that forget my
holy mountain, that set in order a table for Fortune, that ﬁll
up a mingled draught for Destiny:

12 I will (even) destine you for the sword, and ye shall all
crouch down to the slaughter; because I called, and ye did not
answer; I spake, and ye did not hear; but did evil before mine
eyes, and chose that in which I took not pleasure.

13 Therefore, thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, my servants
shall eat, and ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall
drink, and ye shall be thirsty; behold, my servants shall rejoice,
and ye shall be ashamed:

14 Behold, my servants shall sing for happiness of heart, and
ye shall cry out for pain of heart, and shall howl for breaking
of spirit.

15 And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen
and the Lord GOD shall slay thee, and call his servants by
another name;

16 So that he who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless
himself by the God of truth; and he that sweareth in the
earth shall swear by the God of truth; because the ﬁrst distresses
are forgotten, and because they are hid from mine eyes.

17 For behold, I create new heavens and a new earth; and
the ﬁrst things shall not be remembered, nor come up into
the heart.

18 But rejoice ye and exult for ever at that which I create;
for behold, I create Jerusalem an exultation, and her people
a joy.

19 And I Will exult in Jerusalem, and rejoice in my people,
and the voice of weeping shall no more be heard in her, nor
the voice of crying out.

20 There shall be no more from thence an infant of days, or
an old man, that shall not fulfil his days: for the youth a
hundred years old shall die, and the sinner a hundred years
old shall be accursed

21 And they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they
shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.

22 They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not
plant, and another eat; for as the days of the tree are the days
of my people, and my chosen shall wear out the works of
their hands.

23 They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for terror;
for they are the seed of the blessed of the LORD, and their
offspring (shall be) with them.

24 And it shall be, before they shall call, I will answer; still
shall they be speaking, and I will hear.

25 The wolf and the lamb shall graze together, and the lion
shall eat straw like the ox; and (as. for) the serpent, dust his
food. They shall not do evil nor deal corruptly in all my holy
mountain, saith the LORD.

LXVI. 1 Thus saith the LORD, The heavens are my throne,
and the earth the footstool of my feet; where is this house ye
will build unto me? and where is this place of my rest?

2 And all these things hath my hand made, and all these
things came to be, saith the LORD; and to this one will I look,
to him who is afflicted and contrite in spirit, and trembleth at
my word.

3 He that slaughtereth the ox, slayeth a man; he that
sacrificeth the sheep, breaketh a ’s neck; he that offereth
a meal offering, sweene's blood: he that maketh a memorial of
incense, blesseth iniquity. Also they have chosen their own
ways, and their soul taketh pleasure in their abominations.

4 Also I will choose their mockeries, and will bring their fears
upon them; because I called, and there was none that answered;
I spake, and there was none that heard; and they did evil before
mine eyes, and chose that in which I took not pleasure.

5 Hear the word of the LORD, ye that tremble at his word;
your brethren say, that hate you, that drive you away for my
name's sake, Let the LORD show himself glorious, and we shall
see your joy; and they shall be ashamed.

6 A voice of tumult from the city, a voice from the temple,
a voice of the LORD rendering retribution to his enemies.

7 Before she travailed, she brought forth; before pain came to
her, she was delivered of a man child.

8 Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things?
Shall a land be travailed with in one day? shall a nation be born
at once? for Zion travailed, she also brought forth her sons.

9 Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth?
saith the LORD; shall I, that cause to bring forth, shut up (the
womb)? saith thy God.

10 Be ye glad with Jerusalem, and exult in her, all ye that love
her: rejoice with her, all that mourn with her.

11 That ye may suck, and be satisfied from the breast of her
consolations: that ye may milk out, and delight yourselves from
the fulness of her glory.

12 For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I extend to her peace
like a river, and the glory of nations like an ﬂowing stream:
and ye shall suck; ye shall be borne upon the side, be
fondled upon the knees.

13 As a man whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort
you: and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.

14 And ye shall see this, and your heart shall rejoice, and your
bones shall shoot up like the young grass; and the hand of the
LORD shall make itself known toward his servants, and he shall
be indignant toward his enemies.

15 For behold, the LORD shall come in ﬁre, and his chariots
like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke
with ﬂames of ﬁre.

16 For with ﬁre will the LORD enter into judgment, and
with his sword with all ﬂesh; and the smitten of the LORD
shall be many.

17 They that hallow themselves, and purify themselves for
the gardens behind one in the midst, eating swine's ﬂesh, and
the abomination, and the mouse, shall come to an end together,
saith the LORD.

18 And I . . . . . . their works and their thoughts: it cometh,
to gather all nations and tongues: and they shall come, and see
my glory.

19 And I will set a sign among them, and I will send the
escaped of them unto the nations, Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that
draw the bow, Tubal and Javan, the isles afar off, that have not
heard my message, neither have seen my glory; and they shall
tell my glory among the nations.

20 And they shall bring all your brethren out of all nations,
a (meal) offering unto the LORD, upon horses, and in chariots,
and in litters, and upon mules, and upon dromedaries, to my
holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the LORD, as the children of
Israel bring the (meal) offering in a clean vessel to the house
of the LORD.

21 And also of them will I take for the priests, for the
Levites, saith the LORD.

22 For as the. new heavens and the new earth, which I make,
stand before me, saith the LORD, so shall your seed and your
name stand.

23 And it shall be, from new moon to new moon, and from
sabbath to sabbath, shall all ﬂesh come to worship before me,
saith the LORD.

24 And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of
the men that have rebelled against me: for their worm shall
not die, and their ﬁre shall not be quenched; and they shall
be a horror unto all ﬂesh.