The natural result of any investigation is that the
investigators either discover the object of search or
deny that it is discoverable and confess it to be
inapprehensible or persist in their search.

So, too, with regard to the objects investigated by 
philosophy, this is probably why some have claimed to 
have discovered the truth, others have asserted that it 
cannot be apprehended, while others again go on inquiring.

Those who believe they have discovered it are the 
‟Dogmatists,” specially so called—Aristotle, for
example, and Epicurus and the Stoics and certain
others; Cleitomachus and Carneades and other
Academics 
treat it as inapprehensible: the Sceptics keep on searching.

Hence it seems reasonable to hold that the main types of 
philosophy are three—the Dogmatic, the Academic, and the Sceptic. 
Of the other systems it will best become others to speak: our 
task at present is to describe in outline the Sceptic doctrine,
 
first premising that of none of our future statements do we 
positively affirm that the fact is exactly as we state it, 
but we simply record each fact, like a chronicler, as it 
appears to us at the moment.

Of the Sceptic philosophy one argument (or branch 
of exposition) is called ‟general,” the other ‟special.”
In the general argument we set forth the distinctive
features of Scepticism, stating its purport and 
principles, its logical methods, criterion, and end or aim; 
the ‟Tropes,” also, or ‟Modes,” which lead to suspension 
of judgement, and in what sense we adopt the Sceptic 
formulae, and the distinction between Scepticism 
and the philosophies which stand next to it.

In the special argument we state our objections 
regarding the several divisions of so-called philosophy.
 
Let us, then, deal first with the general
argument, beginning our description with the names
given to the Sceptic School.

The Sceptic School, then, is also called ‟Zetetic” 
from its activity in investigation and inquiry, and
‟Ephectic” or Suspensive from the state of mind
produced in the inquirer after his search, and
‟Aporetic” or Dubitative either from its habit of
doubting and seeking, as some say, or from its
indecision as regards assent and denial, and ‟Pyrrhonian” 
from the fact that Pyrrho appears to us to
have applied himself to Scepticism more thoroughly
and more conspicuously than his predecessors.

Scepticism is an ability, or mental attitude, which
opposes appearances to judgements in any way
whatsoever, with the result that, owing to the 
equipollence of the objects and reasons thus opposed, we
are brought firstly to a state of mental suspense and
next to a state of ‟unperturbedness” or quietude.

Now we call it an ‟ability” not in any subtle sense,
but simply in respect of its ‟being able.” By
‟appearances” we now mean the objects of sense-
perception, whence we contrast them with the objects
of thought or ‟judgements.” The phrase ‟in any
way whatsoever” can be connected either with the
word ‟ability,” to make us take the word ‟ability,”
as we said, in its simple sense, or with the phrase
‟opposing appearances to judgements;” for inasmuch 
as we oppose these in a variety of ways—appearances 
to appearances, or judgements to judgements, or 
/alternando/ appearances to judgements,—in order to 
ensure the inclusion of all these antitheses
we employ the phrase ‟in any way whatsoever.”
Or, again, we join ‟in any way whatsoever” to
‟appearances and judgements” in order that we may
not have to inquire how the appearances appear or
how the thought-objects are judged, but may take
these terms in the simple sense.

The phrase ‟opposed judgements” we do not employ 
in the sense of negations and affirmations only but 
simply as equivalent to ‟conflicting judgements.”
 
‟Equipollence” we use of equality in respect of 
probability and improbability, to indicate that no 
one of the conflicting judgements takes precedence 
of any other as being more probable. ‟Suspense” 
is a state of mental rest owing to which we neither 
deny nor affirm anything. ‟Quietude” is an untroubled 
and tranquil condition of soul. And how quietude 
enters the soul along with suspension of judgement 
we shall explain in our chapter (XII.) ‟Concerning the End.”

In the definition of the Sceptic system there is also
implicitly included that of the Pyrrhonean philosopher:
he is the man who participates in this ‟ability.”

The originating cause of Scepticism is, we say, the
hope of attaining quietude. Men of talent, who were
perturbed by the contradictions in things and in
doubt as to which of the alternatives they ought to
accept, were led on to inquire what is true in things
and what false, hoping by the settlement of this
question to attain quietude. The main basic principle
of the Sceptic system is that of opposing to every
proposition an equal proposition; for we believe that
as a consequence of this we end by ceasing to dogmatize.

When we say that the Sceptic refrains from dogmatizing 
we do not use the term ‟dogma,” as some
do, in the broader sense of ‟approval of a thing”
(for the Sceptic gives assent to the feelings which
are the necessary results of sense-impressions, and
he would not, for example, say when feeling hot or
cold ‟I believe that I am not hot or cold”); but we
say that ‟he does not dogmatize” using ‟dogma”
in the sense, which some give it, of ‟assent to one
of the non-evident objects of scientific inquiry;”
for the Pyrrhonean philosopher assents to nothing
that is non-evident.

Moreover, even in the act of enunciating the Sceptic 
formulae concerning things 
non-evident—such as the formula ‟No more (one thing than another),” 
or the formula ‟I determine nothing,” or any of the others which we shall 
presently mention,—he does not dogmatize. For whereas the 
dogmatizer posits the things about which he is said to be 
dogmatizing as really existent, the Sceptic does not posit 
these formulae in any absolute sense; for
he conceives that, just as the formula ‟All things are
false” asserts the falsity of itself as well as of everything 
else, as does the formula ‟Nothing is true,”
so also the formula ‟No more” asserts that itself,
like all the rest, is ‟No more (this than that),”
and thus cancels itself along with the rest. And
of the other formulae we say the same.

If then, while the dogmatizer posits the matter of his
dogma as substantial truth, the Sceptic enunciates
his formulae so that they are virtually cancelled by
themselves, he should not be said to dogmatize in his
enunciation of them. And, most important of all, in
his enunciation of these formulae he states what
appears to himself and announces his own impression
in an undogmatic way, without making any positive
assertion regarding the external realities.

We follow the same lines in replying to the question
‟Has the Sceptic a doctrinal rule?” For if one
defines a ‟doctrinal rule” as ‟adherence to a number
of dogmas which are dependent both on one another
and on appearances,” and defines ‟dogma” as
‟assent to a non-evident proposition,” then we shall
say that he has not a doctrinal rule.

But if one defines ‟doctrinal rule” as ‟procedure which, 
in accordance with appearance, follows a certain line of
reasoning, that reasoning indicating how it is possible
to seem to live rightly (the word ‘rightly’ being
taken, not as referring to virtue only, but in a wider
sense ) and tending to enable 
one to suspend judgement,” then we say that he has a doctrinal rule.
For we follow a line of reasoning which, in accordance
with appearances, points us to a life conformable to
the customs of our country and its laws and institutions, 
and to our own instinctive feelings.

We make a similar reply also to the question
‟Should the Sceptic deal with physical problems?”
For while, on the one hand, so far as regards making
firm and positive assertions about any of the matters
dogmatically treated in physical theory, we do not
deal with physics; yet, on the other hand, in respect
of our mode of opposing to every proposition an equal
proposition and of our theory of quietude we do treat
of physics. This, too, is the way in which we approach
the logical and ethical branches of so-called ‟philosophy.”

Those who say that ‟the Sceptics abolish appearances,” 
or phenomena, seem to me to be unacquainted
with the statements of our School. For, as we said
above, we do not overthrow the affective sense-
impressions which induce our assent involuntarily;
and these impressions are ‟the appearances.” And
when we question whether the underlying object is
such as it appears, we grant the fact that it appears,
and our doubt does not concern the appearance itself
but the account given of that appearance,—and that
is a different thing from questioning the appearance
itself.

For example, honey appears to us to be
sweet (and this we grant, for we perceive sweetness
through the senses), but whether it is also sweet in
its essence is for us a matter of doubt, since this is
not an appearance but a judgement regarding the
appearance, And even if we do actually argue
against the appearances, we do not propound such
arguments with the intention of abolishing appearances,
but by way of pointing out the rashness of the
Dogmatists; for if reason is such a trickster as to all
but snatch away the appearances from under our very
eyes, surely we should view it with suspicion in the
case of things non-evident so as not to display rashness
by following it.

That we adhere to appearances is plain from what 
we say about the Criterion of the Sceptic School.
The word ‟Criterion” is used in two senses: in the
one it means ‟the standard regulating belief in
reality or unreality,” (and this we shall discuss in
our refutation ); 
in the other it denotes the standard
of action by conforming to which in the conduct of
life we perform some actions and abstain from others;
and it is of the latter that we are now speaking.

The criterion, then, of the Sceptic School is, we say, 
the appearance, giving this name to what is virtually the
sense-presentation. For since this lies in feeling and
involuntary affection, it is not open to question.
Consequently, no one, I suppose, disputes that the
underlying object has this or that appearance; the
point in dispute is whether the object is in reality
such as it appears to be.

Adhering, then, to appearances we live in accordance
with the normal rules of life, undogmatically,
seeing that we cannot remain wholly inactive. 
And it would seem that this regulation of life is fourfold,
and that one part of it lies in the guidance of Nature,
another in the constraint of the passions, another in
the tradition of laws and customs, another in the
instruction of the arts.

Nature’s guidance is that by which we are naturally capable 
of sensation and thought; constraint of the passions is that 
whereby hunger drives us to food and thirst to drink; tradition 
of customs and laws, that whereby we regard piety in the conduct 
of life as good, but impiety as evil; instruction of the arts, 
that whereby we are not inactive in such arts as we adopt. 
But we make all these statements undogmatically.

Our next subject will be the End of the Sceptic 
system. Now an ‟End” is ‟that for which all
actions or reasonings are undertaken, while it exists
for the sake of none;” or, otherwise, ‟the ultimate
object of appetency.” 
We assert still that the Sceptic’s End is quietude in respect of matters of
opinion and moderate feeling in respect of things
unavoidable.

For the Sceptic, having set out to 
philosophize with the object of passing judgement
on the sense-impressions and ascertaining which of
them are true and which false, so as to attain quietude
thereby, found himself involved in contradictions of
equal weight, and being unable to decide between
them suspended judgement; and as he was thus in
suspense there followed, as it happened, the state
of quietude in respect of matters of opinion.

For the man who opines that anything is by nature good
or bad is for ever being disquieted: when he is
without the things which he deems good he believes
himself to be tormented by things naturally bad and
he pursues after the things which are, as he thinks,
good; which when he has obtained he keeps falling
into still more perturbations because of his irrational
and immoderate elation, and in his dread of a change
of fortune he uses every endeavour to avoid losing
the things which he deems good.

On the other hand, the man who determines 
nothing as to what is naturally 
good or bad neither shuns nor pursues anything
eagerly; and, in consequence, he is unperturbed. 
 The Sceptic, in fact, had the same experience which
is said to have befallen the painter Apelles. Once,
they say, when he was painting a horse and wished
to represent in the painting the horse’s foam, he was
so unsuccessful that he gave up the attempt and flung
at the picture the sponge on which he used to wipe
the paints off his brush, and the mark of the sponge
produced the effect of a horse’s foam.

So, too, the Sceptics were in hopes of gaining quietude 
by means of a decision regarding the disparity of the 
objects of sense and of thought, and being unable to effect 
this they suspended judgement; and they found that
quietude, as if by chance, followed upon their suspense, 
even as a shadow follows its substance. We do
not, however, suppose that the Sceptic is wholly
untroubled; but we say that he is troubled by things
unavoidable; for we grant that he is cold at times
and thirsty, and suffers various affections of that kind.

But even in these cases, whereas ordinary people are 
afflicted by two circumstances,—namely, by the affections 
themselves and, in no less a degree, by the belief that 
these conditions are evil by nature,—the Sceptic, by his 
rejection of the added belief in the natural badness of 
all these conditions, escapes here too with less discomfort. 
Hence we say that, while in regard to matters of opinion 
the Sceptic’s End is quietude, in regard to things 
unavoidable it is ‟moderate affection.” But some notable 
Sceptics 
have added the further definition ‟suspension 
of judgement in investigations.”

Now that we have been saying that tranquillity 
follows on suspension of judgement, it will be our
next task to explain how we arrive at this suspension.
Speaking generally, one may say that it is the result
of setting things in opposition. We oppose either
appearances to appearances or objects of thought to
objects of thought or alternando.

For instance, we oppose appearances to appearances 
when we say ‟The same tower appears round from a distance,
but square from close at hand;” and thoughts to
thoughts, when in answer to him who argues the
existence of Providence from the order of the heavenly
bodies we oppose the fact that often the good fare
ill and the bad fare well, and draw from this the 
inference that Providence does not exist.

And thoughts we oppose to appearances, as when Anaxagoras 
countered the notion that snow is white with the
argument, ‟Snow is frozen water, and water is
black; therefore snow also is black.” With a
different idea we oppose things present sometimes
to things present, as in the foregoing examples, and
sometimes to things past or future, as, for instance,
when someone propounds to us a theory which we
are unable to refute, we say to him in reply,

‟Just as, before the birth of the founder of the School 
to which you belong, the theory it holds was not as yet
apparent as a sound theory, although it was really
in existence, so likewise it is possible that the
opposite theory to that which you now propound is
already really existent, though not yet apparent to
us, so that we ought not as yet to yield assent to this
theory which at the moment seems to be valid.”

But in order that we may have a more exact understanding 
of these antitheses I will describe the Modes
by which suspension of judgement is brought about,
but without making any positive assertion regarding
either their number or their validity; for it is possible
that they may be unsound or there may be more of
them than I shall enumerate.

The usual tradition amongst the older Sceptics is 
that the ‟modes” by which ‟suspension” is supposed
to be brought about are ten in number; and they also
give them the synonymous names of ‟arguments”
and ‟positions.” They are these: the first, based on
the variety in animals; the second, on the differences
in human beings; the third, on the different structures 
of the organs of sense; the fourth, on the
circumstantial conditions; the fifth, on positions and
intervals and locations; the sixth, on intermixtures;

the seventh, on the quantities and formations of the
underlying objects; the eighth, on the fact of relativity; 
the ninth, on the frequency or rarity of
occurrence; the tenth, on the disciplines and customs
and laws, the legendary beliefs and the dogmatic convictions.

This order, however, we adopt without prejudice. 
 As superordinate to these there stand three Modes
—that based on the subject who judges, that on the
object judged, and that based on both. The first four
of the ten Modes are subordinate to the Mode based
on the subject (for the subject which judges is
either an animal or a man or a sense, and existent in
some condition): the seventh and tenth Modes are
referred to that based on the object judged: the
fifth, sixth, eighth and ninth are referred to the Mode
based on both subject and object.

Furthermore, these three Modes are also referred to that 
of relation, so that the Mode of relation stands as the 
highest genus, and the three as species, and the ten as 
subordinate sub-species. We give this as the probable account 
of their numbers; and as to their argumentative
force what we say is this:

The First argument (or Trope), as we said, is that 
which shows that the same impressions are not produced 
by the same objects owing to the differences
in animals. This we infer both from the differences
in their origins and from the variety of their bodily
structures.

Thus, as to origin, some animals are produced 
without sexual union, others by coition. And
of those produced without coition, some come from
fire, like the animalcules which appear in furnaces,
others from putrid water, like gnats; others from
wine when it turns sour, like ants; others from earth,
like grasshoppers; others from marsh, like frogs;
others from mud, like worms; others from asses, like
beetles; others from greens, like caterpillars; others
from fruits, like the gall-insects in wild figs; others
from rotting animals, as bees from bulls and wasps
from horses.

Of the animals generated by coition, 
some—in fact the majority—come from homogeneous
parents, others from heterogeneous parents, as do
mules. Again, of animals in general, some are born
alive, like men ; others are born as eggs, like birds;
and yet others as lumps of flesh, like bears.

It is natural, then, that these dissimilar and variant
modes of birth should produce much contrariety
of sense-affection, and that this is a source of its
divergent, discordant and conflicting character.

Moreover, the differences found in the most important 
parts of the body, and especially in those of
which the natural function is judging and perceiving,
are capable of producing a vast deal of divergence
in the sense-impressions owing to the variety in the
animals . Thus, sufferers from jaundice declare that
objects which seem to us white are yellow, while those
whose eyes are bloodshot call them blood-red. Since,
then, some animals also have eyes which are yellow,
others bloodshot, others albino, others of other
colours, they probably, I suppose, have different
perceptions of colour.

Moreover, if we bend down over a book after having gazed 
long and fixedly at the sun, the letters seem to us to be 
golden in colour and circling round. Since, then, some animals 
possess also a natural brilliance in their eyes, and emit 
from them a fine and mobile stream of light, so that they 
can even see by night, we seem bound to suppose
that they are differently affected from us by external
objects.

Jugglers, too, by means of smearing lamp-wicks 
with the rust of copper or with the juice of the
cuttle-fish make the bystanders appear now copper-
coloured and now black—and that by just a small
sprinkling of extra matter. Surely, then, we have
much more reason to suppose that when different
juices are intermingled in the vision of animals their
impressions of the objects will become different.

Again, when we press the eyeball at one side the 
forms, figures and sizes of the objects appear oblong
and narrow. So it is probable that all animals which
have the pupil of the eye slanting and elongated—
such as goats, cats, and similar animals—have impressions 
of the objects which are different and unlike the notions 
formed of them by the animals which have
round pupils.

Mirrors, too, owing to differences in 
their construction, represent the external objects at
one time as very small—as when the mirror is concave,
—at another time as elongated and narrow—as when
the mirror is convex. Some mirrors, too, show the
head of the figure reflected at the bottom and the
feet at the top.

Since, then, some organs of sight 
actually protrude beyond the face owing to their
convexity, while others are quite concave, and others
again lie in a level plane, on this account also it is
probable that their impressions differ, and that the
same objects, as seen by dogs, fishes, lions, men
and locusts, are neither equal in size nor similar in
shape, but vary according to the image of each object
created by the particular sight that receives the
impression.

Of the other sense-organs also the same account 
holds good. Thus, in respect of touch, how could
one maintain that creatures covered with shells, with
flesh, with prickles, with feathers, with scales, are all
similarly affected? And as for the sense of hearing,
how could we say that its perceptions are alike in
animals with a very narrow auditory passage and
those with a very wide one, or in animals with hairy
ears and those with smooth ears? For, as regards this
sense, even we ourselves find our hearing affected in
one way when we have our ears plugged and in
another way when we use them just as they are.

Smell also will differ because of the variety in animals. 
For if we ourselves are affected in one way when we
have a cold and our internal phlegm is excessive, and
in another way when the parts about our head are
filled with an excess of blood, feeling an aversion to
smells which seem sweet to everyone else and regarding 
them as noxious, it is reasonable to suppose that
animals too—since some are flaccid by nature and
rich in phlegm, others rich in blood, others marked
by a predominant excess of yellow or of black gall—
are in each case impressed in different ways by the
objects of smell.

So too with the objects of taste; 
for some animals have rough and dry tongues, others
extremely moist tongues. We ourselves, too, when
our tongues are very dry, in cases of fever, think the
food proffered us to be earthy and ill-flavoured or
bitter—an affection due to the variation in the
predominating juices which we are said to contain.
Since, then, animals also have organs of taste which
differ and which have different juices in excess,
in respect of taste also they will receive different
impressions of the real objects.

For just as the same food when digested becomes in one 
place a vein, in another an artery, in another a bone, 
in another a sinew, or some other piece of the body, 
displaying a different potency according to the difference 
in the parts which receive it;—and just as the same unblended 
water, when it is absorbed by trees, becomes in one place bark, 
in another branch, in another blossom, and so finally fig and 
quince and each of the other fruits;

—and just as the single identical breath of a musician 
breathed into a flute becomes here a shrill note and there 
a deep note, and the same pressure of his hand on the 
lyre produces here a deep note and there a shrill note;—so 
likewise it is probable that the external objects appear 
different owing to differences in the structure of 
the animals which experience the sense-impressions.

But one may learn this more clearly from the 
preferences and aversions of animals. Thus, sweet
oil seems very agreeable to men, but intolerable to
beetles and bees; and olive oil is beneficial to men,
but when poured on wasps and bees it destroys them;
and sea-water is a disagreeable and poisonous potion
for men, but fish drink and enjoy it.

Pigs, too, enjoy wallowing in the most stinking mire 
rather than in clear and clean water. And whereas 
some animals eat grass, others eat shrubs, others 
feed in woods, others live on seeds or flesh or milk; 
some of them, too, prefer their food high, others like 
it fresh, and while some prefer it raw, others like it 
cooked. And so generally, the things which are agreeable 
to some are to others disagreeable, distasteful and deadly.

Thus, quails are fattened by hemlock, and pigs by 
henbane; and pigs also enjoy eating salamanders,
just as deer enjoy poisonous creatures, and swallows
gnats. So ants and wood-lice, when swallowed by
men, cause distress and gripings, whereas the bear,
whenever she falls sick, cures herself by licking them
up.

The mere touch of an oak-twig paralyses the 
viper, and that of a plane-leaf the bat. The elephant
flees from the ram, the lion from the cock, sea-
monsters from the crackle of bursting beans, and the
tiger from the sound of a drum. One might, indeed,
cite many more examples, but—not to seem unduly
prolix—if the same things are displeasing to some
but pleasing to others, and pleasure and displeasure
depend upon sense-impression, then animals receive
different impressions from the underlying objects.

But if the same things appear different owing to 
the variety in animals, we shall, indeed, be able to
state our own impressions of the real object, but as
to its essential nature we shall suspend judgement.
For we cannot ourselves judge between our own
impressions and those of the other animals, since we
ourselves are involved in the dispute and are, therefore, 
rather in need of a judge than competent to
pass judgement ourselves.

Besides, we are unable, either with or without proof, 
to prefer our own impressions to those of the irrational 
animals. For in addition to the probability that proof is, 
as we shall show, a non-entity, the so-called proof itself 
will be either apparent to us or non-apparent. If, then, 
it is non-apparent, we shall not accept it with confidence; 
while if it is apparent to us, inasmuch as what is apparent 
to animals is the point in question and the proof is apparent 
to us who are animals, it follows that we shall have to question 
the proof itself as to whether it is as true as it is apparent.

It is, indeed, absurd to attempt to establish the matter 
in question by means of the matter in question, since in that case the same thing will be at once believed and
disbelieved,—believed in so far as it purports to prove,
but disbelieved in so far as it requires proof,—which
is impossible. Consequently we shall not possess a
proof which enables us to give our own sense-impressions 
the preference over those of the so-called
irrational animals. If, then, owing to the variety in
animals their sense-impressions differ, and it is impossible 
to judge between them, we must necessarily
suspend judgement regarding the external underlying 
objects.

By way of super-addition, 
too, we draw comparisons between mankind and the so-called irrational animals
in respect of their sense-impressions. For, after our
solid arguments, we deem it quite proper to poke fun
at those conceited braggarts, the Dogmatists. As
a rule, our School compare the irrational animals in
the mass with mankind;

but since the Dogmatists captiously assert that the comparison 
is unequal, we—super-adding yet more—will carry our ridicule 
further and base our argument on one animal only, the dog for 
instance if you like, which is held to be the most worthless 
of animals. For even in this case we shall find that the animals 
we are discussing are no wise inferior to ourselves in respect 
of the credibility of their impressions.

Now it is allowed by the Dogmatists that this 
animal, the dog, excels us in point of sensation: as
to smell it is more sensitive than we are, since by
this sense it tracks beasts that it cannot see; and
with its eyes it sees them more quickly than we do;
and with its ears it is keen of perception.

Next let us proceed to the reasoning faculty. Of 
reason one kind is internal, implanted in the soul, the other
externally expressed. 
Let us consider first the internal reason. Now according to those Dogmatists
who are, at present, our chief opponents—I mean the
Stoics—internal reason is supposed to be occupied
with the following matters: the choice of things congenial 
and the avoidance of things alien; the knowledge of the 
arts contributing thereto; the apprehension 
of the virtues pertaining to one’s proper
nature and of those relating to the passions.

Now the dog—the animal upon which, by way of example,
we have decided to base our argument—exercises
choice of the congenial and avoidance of the harmful,
in that it hunts after food and slinks away from a
raised whip. Moreover, it possesses an art which
supplies what is congenial, namely hunting.

Nor is it devoid even of virtue; for certainly if justice
consists in rendering to each his due, 
the dog, that welcomes and guards its friends and benefactors but
drives off strangers and evil-doers, cannot be lacking
injustice.

But if he possesses this virtue, then, since 
the virtues are interdependent, he possesses also all
the other virtues; and these, say the philosophers, 
the majority of men do not possess. That the dog is
also valiant we see by the way he repels attacks, and
intelligent as well, as Homer too testified when he
sang how Odysseus went unrecognized by all the
people of his own household and was recognized only
by the dog Argus, who neither was deceived by the
bodily alterations of the hero nor had lost his original
apprehensive impression, which indeed he evidently
retained better than the men.

And according to Chrysippus, who shows special interest 
in irrational animals, the dog even shares in the far-famed 
‟Dialectic.” This person, at any rate, declares that the dog 
makes use of the fifth complex indemonstrable syllogism 
when, on arriving at a spot where three ways meet, after smelling 
at the two roads by which the quarry did not pass, he rushes 
off at once by the third without stopping to smell. For, says the old
writer, the dog implicitly reasons thus: ‟The creature
went either by this road, or by that, or by the other:
but it did not go by this road or by that: therefore it
went by the other.”

Moreover, the dog is capable of comprehending and 
assuaging his own sufferings; for when a thorn has 
got stuck in his foot he hastens to remove it by 
rubbing his foot on the ground and by using his teeth. 
And if he has a wound anywhere, because dirty wounds 
are hard to cure whereas clean ones heal easily, the 
dog gently licks off the pus that has gathered.

Nay more, the dog admirably observes the prescription 
of Hippocrates: rest being what cures the foot, whenever 
he gets his foot hurt he lifts it up and keeps it as far 
as possible free from pressure. And when distressed by 
unwholesome humours he eats grass, by the help of 
which he vomits what is unwholesome and gets well again.

If, then, it has been shown that the animal upon which, 
as an example, we have based our argument not only chooses 
the wholesome and avoids the noxious, but also possesses 
an art capable of supplying what is wholesome, and 
is capable of comprehending and assuaging its own
sufferings, and is not devoid of virtue, then—these
being the things in which the perfection of internal
reason consists—the dog will be thus far perfect.
And that, I suppose, is why certain of the professors
of philosophy have adorned themselves with the title
of this animal.

Concerning external reason, or speech, it is unnecessary 
for the present to inquire; for it has been
rejected even by some of the Dogmatists as being
a hindrance to the acquisition of virtue, for which
reason they used to practise silence during the period
of instruction; and besides, supposing that a man is
dumb, no one will therefore call him irrational. But
to pass over these cases, we certainly see animals—
the subject of our argument—uttering quite human
cries,—jays, for instance, and others.

And, leaving this point also aside, even if we do not 
understand the utterances of the so-called irrational 
animals, still it is not improbable that they converse 
although we fail to understand them; for in fact when we 
listen to the talk of barbarians we do not understand it,
and it seems to us a kind of uniform chatter.

Moreover, we hear dogs uttering one sound when they are
driving people off, another when they are howling,
and one sound when beaten, and a quite different
sound when fawning. And so in general, in the case
of all other animals as well as the dog, whoever
examines the matter carefully will find a great variety
of utterance according to the different circumstances,
so that, in consequence, the so-called irrational
animals may justly be said to participate in external
reason.

But if they neither fall short of mankind in 
the accuracy of their perceptions, nor in internal
reason, nor yet (to go still further) in external reason,
or speech, then they will deserve no less credence
than ourselves in respect of their sense-impressions.

Probably, too, we may reach this conclusion by basing 
our argument on each single class of irrational animals.
Thus, for example, who would deny that birds excel
in quickness of wit or that they employ external
reason? For they understand not only present
events but future events as well, and these they foreshow 
to such as are able to comprehend them by
means of prophetic cries as well as by other signs.

I have drawn this comparison (as I previously 
indicated) by way of super-addition, having already
sufficiently proved, as I think, that we cannot prefer
our own sense-impressions to those of the irrational
animals. If, however, the irrational animals are not
less worthy of credence than we in regard to the
value of sense-impressions, and their impressions vary
according to the variety of animal,—then, although
I shall be able to say what the nature of each of the
underlying objects appears to me to be, I shall be
compelled, for the reasons stated above, to suspend
judgement as to its real nature.

Such, then, is the First of the Modes which induce 
suspense. The Second Mode is, as we said, that based
on the differences in men; for even if we grant for
the sake of argument that men are more worthy of
credence than irrational animals, we shall find that
even our own differences of themselves lead to suspense. 
For man, you know, is said to be compounded
of two things, soul and body, and in both these we
differ one from another. 
 Thus, as regards the body, we differ in our figures
and ‟idiosyncrasies,” or constitutional peculiarities.

The body of an Indian differs in shape from that of
a Scythian; and it is said that what causes the variation 
is a difference in the predominant humours,
Owing to this difference in the predominant humours
the sense-impressions also come to differ, as we 
indicated in our First Argument. So too in respect of
choice and avoidance of external objects men exhibit
great differences: thus Indians enjoy some things,
our people other things, and the enjoyment of different
things is an indication that we receive varying 
impressions from the underlying objects.

In respect of our ‟idiosyncrasies,” our differences are 
such that some of us digest the flesh of oxen more 
easily than rock-fish, or get diarrhoea from the weak wine of
Lesbos. An old wife of Attica, they say, swallowed
with impunity thirty drams of hemlock, and Lysis
took four drams of poppy-juice without hurt.

Demophon, Alexander’s butler, used to shiver when he was
in the sun or in a hot bath, but felt warm in the shade:
Athenagoras the Argive took no hurt from the stings
of scorpions and poisonous spiders; and the Psyllaeans, 
as they are called, are not harmed by bites
from snakes and asps,

nor are the Tentyritae of Egypt harmed by the crocodile. 
Further, those Ethiopians who live beyond Lake Meroë on 
the banks of the river Astapous eat with impunity scorpions, 
snakes, and the like. Rufinus of Chalcis when he drank hellebore 
neither vomited nor suffered at all from purging, but swallowed 
and digested it just like any ordinary drink.

Chrysermus the Herophilean doctor was liable to 
get a heart attack if ever he took pepper;
and Soterichus the surgeon was seized with diarrhoea
whenever he smelled fried sprats. Andron the Argive
was so immune from thirst that he actually traversed
the waterless country of Libya without needing a
drink. Tiberius Caesar could see in the dark; and
Aristotle tells of a Thasian who fancied that the
image of a man was continually going in front of him.

Seeing, then, that men vary so much in body—to 
content ourselves with but a few instances of the
many collected by the Dogmatists,—men probably
also differ from one another in respect of the soul
itself; for the body is a kind of expression of the soul,
as in fact is proved by the science of Physiognomy.
But the greatest proof of the vast and endless differences 
in men’s intelligence is the discrepancy in the
statements of the Dogmatists concerning the right
objects of choice and avoidance, as well as other
things.

Regarding this the poets, too, have expressed 
themselves fittingly. Thus Pindar says: 
 
 The crowns and trophies of his storm-foot steeds
 Give joy to one ; yet others find it joy
 To dwell in gorgeous chambers gold-bedeckt;
 Some even take delight in voyaging
 O’er ocean’s billows in a speeding barque. 

And the poet says: ‟One thing is pleasing to one
man, another thing to another.” Tragedy, too, is
full of such sayings; for example:
 
 Were fair and wise the same thing unto all,
 There had been no contentious quarrelling. 

And again:
 
 'Tis strange that the same thing abhorr’d by some
 Should give delight to others.

Seeing, then, that choice and avoidance depend on 
pleasure and displeasure, while pleasure and displeasure 
depend on sensation and sense-impression,
whenever some men choose the very things which
are avoided by others, it is logical for us to conclude
that they are also differently affected by the same
things, since otherwise they would all alike have
chosen or avoided the same things. But if the same
objects affect men differently owing to the differences
in the men, then, on this ground also, we shall 
reasonably be led to suspension of judgement. For while
we are, no doubt, able to state what each of the
underlying objects appears to be, relatively to each
difference, we are incapable of explaining what it is
in reality.

For we shall have to believe either all 
men or some. But if we believe all, we shall be
attempting the impossible and accepting contradictories; 
and if some, let us be told whose opinions we
are to endorse. For the Platonist will say ‟Plato’s;”
the Epicurean, ‟Epicurus’s;” and so on with the
rest; and thus by their unsettled disputations they
will bring us round again to a state of suspense.

Moreover, he who maintains that we ought to assent 
to the majority is making a childish proposal, since
no one is able to visit the whole of mankind and
determine what pleases the majority of them; for
there may possibly be races of whom we know nothing
amongst whom conditions rare with us are common,
and conditions common with us rare,—possibly, for
instance, most of them feel no pain from the bites
of spiders, though a few on rare occasions feel such
pain; and so likewise with the rest of the ‟idiosyncrasies” 
mentioned above. Necessarily, therefore, the
differences in men afford a further reason for bringing
in suspension of judgement.

When the Dogmatists—a self-loving class of men—
assert that in judging things they ought to prefer
themselves to other people, we know that their claim
is absurd; for they themselves are a party to the
controversy; and if, when judging appearances, they
have already given the preference to themselves, then,
by thus entrusting themselves with the judgement,
they are begging the question before the judgement
is begun.

Nevertheless, in order that we may arrive
at suspension of judgement by basing our argument
on one person—such as, for example, their visionary
‟Sage” —we adopt the Mode which comes Third
in order. 
 This Third Mode is, we say, based on differences
in the senses. That the senses differ from one
another is obvious.

Thus, to the eye paintings seem to have recesses and 
projections, but not so to the touch. Honey, too, seems 
to some pleasant to the tongue but unpleasant to the eyes; 
so that it is impossible to say whether it is absolutely 
pleasant or unpleasant. The same is true of sweet oil, for 
it pleases the sense of smell but displeases the taste.

So too with spurge: since it pains the eyes but 
causes no pain to any other part of the body, we cannot
say whether, in its real nature, it is absolutely painful
or painless to bodies. Rain-water, too, is beneficial
to the eyes but roughens the wind-pipe and the lungs;
as also does olive-oil, though it mollifies the epidermis. 
The cramp-fish, also, when applied to the extremities produces 
cramp, but it can be applied to the rest of the body without hurt. 
Consequently we are unable to say what is the real nature of 
each of these things, although it is possible to say what each 
thing at the moment appears to be.

A longer list of examples might be given, but to 
avoid prolixity, in view of the plan of our treatise,
we will say just this. Each of the phenomena
perceived by the senses seems to be a complex: the
apple, for example, seems smooth, odorous, sweet and
yellow. But it is non-evident whether it really
possesses these qualities only; or whether it has but
one quality but appears varied owing to the varying
structure of the sense-organs; or whether, again, it
has more qualities than are apparent, some of which
elude our perception.

That the apple has but one quality might be argued from what 
we said above regarding the food absorbed by bodies, and the water 
sucked up by trees, and the breath in flutes and pipes and similar 
instruments; for the apple likewise may be all of one sort but appear 
different owing to differences in the sense-organs in which perception 
takes place.

And that the apple may possibly possess more qualities 
than those apparent to us we argue in this way. Let us 
imagine a man who possesses from birth the senses of touch, 
taste and smell, but can neither hear nor see. This man, then, 
will assume that nothing visible or audible has any existence, 
but only those three kinds of qualities which he is able to 
apprehend.

Possibly, then, we also, having only 
our five senses, perceive only such of the apple's
qualities as we are capable of apprehending; and
possibly it may possess other underlying qualities
which affect other sense-organs, though we, not being
endowed with those organs, fail to apprehend the
sense-objects which come through them.

‟But,” it may be objected, ‟Nature made the 
senses commensurate with the objects of sense.”
What kind of ‟Nature?” we ask, seeing that there
exists so much unresolved controversy amongst the
Dogmatists concerning the reality which belongs to
Nature. For he who decides the question as to the
existence of Nature will be discredited by them if
he is an ordinary person, while if he is a philosopher
he will be a party to the controversy and therefore
himself subject to judgement and not a judge.

If, however, it is possible that only those qualities 
which we seem to perceive subsist in the apple, or that a
greater number subsist, or, again, that not even the
qualities which affect us subsist, then it will be non-
evident to us what the nature of the apple really is.
And the same argument applies to all the other
objects of sense. But if the senses do not apprehend
external objects, neither can the mind apprehend
them; hence, because of this argument also, we shall
be driven, it seems, to suspend judgement regarding
the external underlying objects.

In order that we may finally reach suspension by
our argument on each sense singly, or even
by disregarding the senses, we further adopt the
Fourth Mode of suspension. This is the Mode based,
as we say, on the ‟circumstances,” meaning by
‟circumstances” conditions or dispositions. And this
Mode, we say, deals with states that are natural or
unnatural, with waking or sleeping, with conditions
due to age, motion or rest, hatred or love, emptiness
or fulness, drunkenness or soberness, predispositions,
confidence or fear, grief or joy.

Thus, according as the mental state is natural or unnatural,
objects produce dissimilar impressions, as when men in a frenzy 
or in a state of ecstasy believe they hear daemons’ voices, while 
we do not. Similarly they often say that they perceive an odour of 
storax or frankincense, or some such scent, and many other things, 
though we fail to perceive them. Also, the same water which feels 
very hot when poured on inflamed spots seems lukewarm to us.And the 
same coat which seems of a bright yellow colour to men with blood-shot 
eyes does not appear so to me. And the same honey seems to
me sweet, but bitter to men with jaundice.

Now should anyone say that it is an intermixture of 
certain humours which produces in those who are in an
unnatural state improper impressions from the under-
lying objects, we have to reply that, since healthy
persons also have mixed humours, these humours too
are capable of causing the external objects—which
really are such as they appear to those who are said
to be in an unnatural state—to appear other than they
are to healthy persons.

For to ascribe the power of altering the underlying objects 
to those humours, and not to these, is purely fanciful; since 
just as healthy men are in a state that is natural for the healthy 
but unnatural for the sick, so also sick men are in a state that is 
unnatural for the healthy but natural for the sick, so that to these 
last also we must give credence as being, relatively speaking, in a 
natural state.

Sleeping and waking, too, give rise to different
impressions, since we do not imagine when awake
what we imagine in sleep, nor when asleep what we
imagine when awake; so that the existence or non-
existence of our impressions is not absolute but
relative, being in relation to our sleeping or waking
condition. Probably, then, in dreams we see things
which to our waking state are unreal, although not
wholly unreal; for they exist in our dreams, just as
waking realities exist although non-existent in dreams.

Age is another cause of difference. For the same
air seems chilly to the old but mild to those in their
prime; and the same colour appears faint to older
men but vivid to those in their prime; and similarly
the same sound seems to the former faint, but to the
latter clearly audible.

Moreover, those who differ in age are differently moved 
in respect of choice and avoidance. For whereas children—to 
take a case—are all eagerness for balls and hoops, men in 
their prime choose other things, and old men yet others. 
And from this we conclude that differences in age
also cause different impressions to be produced by
the same underlying objects.

Another cause why the real objects appear different
lies in motion and rest. For those objects which,
when we are standing still, we see to be motionless,
we imagine to be in motion when we are sailing
past them.

Love and hatred are a cause, as when some have
an extreme aversion to pork while others greatly
enjoy eating it. Hence, too, Menander said: 
 
 Mark now his visage, what a change is there
 Since he has come to this! How bestial!
 'Tis actions fair that make the fairest face. 
Many lovers, too, who have ugly mistresses think
them most beautiful.

Hunger and satiety are a cause; for the same food 
seems agreeable to the hungry but disagreeable to
the sated. 
 Drunkenness and soberness are a cause; since
actions which we think shameful when sober do not
seem shameful to us when drunk.

Predispositions are a cause; for the same wine 
which seems sour to those who have previously eaten
dates or figs, seems sweet to those who have just
consumed nuts or chick-peas; and the vestibule of
the bath-house, which warms those entering from
outside, chills those coming out of the bath-room if
they stop long in it.

Fear and boldness are a cause; as what seems to
the coward fearful and formidable does not seem so
in the least to the bold man. 
 Grief and joy are a cause; since the same affairs
are burdensome to those in grief but delightful to
those who rejoice.

Seeing then that the dispositions also are the cause
of so much disagreement, and that men are differently
disposed at different times, although, no doubt, it is
easy to say what nature each of the underlying objects
appears to each man to possess, we cannot go on to
say what its real nature is, since the disagreement
admits in itself of no settlement. For the person who
tries to settle it is either in one of the afore-mentioned 
dispositions or in no disposition whatsoever. But to declare 
that he is in no disposition at all—as, for instance, 
neither in health nor sickness, neither in
motion nor at rest, of no definite age, and devoid of
all the other dispositions as well—is the height of
absurdity. And if he is to judge the sense-impressions 
while he is in some one disposition, he will be a
party to the disagreement,

and, moreover, he will not be an impartial judge of the 
external underlying objects owing to his being confused 
by the dispositions in which he is placed. The waking person, 
for instance, cannot compare the impressions of sleepers with 
those of men awake, nor the sound person those of the sick with 
those of the sound; for we assent more readily to things present, 
which affect us in the present, than to things not present.

In another way, too, the disagreement of such
impressions is incapable of settlement. For he who
prefers one impression to another, or one ‟circumstance” 
to another, does so either uncritically and
without proof or critically and with proof; but he
can do this neither without these means (for then he
would be discredited) nor with them. For if he is to
pass judgement on the impressions he must certainly
judge them by a criterion;

this criterion, then, he will declare to be true, or else false. 
But if false, he will be discredited; whereas, if he shall declare 
it to be true, he will be stating that the criterion is true either 
without proof or with proof. But if without proof, he will be discredited; 
and if with proof, it will certainly be necessary for the proof also 
to be true, to avoid being discredited. Shall he, then, affirm the 
truth of the proof adopted to establish the criterion after having 
judged it or without judging it?

If without judging, he will be discredited; but if after
Judging, plainly he will say that he has judged it by
a criterion; and of that criterion we shall ask for a
proof, and of that proof again a criterion. For the
proof always requires a criterion to confirm it, and
the criterion also a proof to demonstrate its truth;
and neither can a proof be sound without the previous
existence of a true criterion nor can the criterion be
true without the previous confirmation of the proof.

So in this way both the criterion and the proof are 
involved in the circular process of reasoning, and
thereby both are found to be untrustworthy; for
since each of them is dependent on the credibility of
the other, the one is lacking in credibility just as much
as the other. Consequently, if a man can prefer one
impression to another neither without a proof and a
criterion nor with them, then the different impressions
due to the differing conditions will admit of no settlement; 
so that as a result of this Mode also we are
brought to suspend judgement regarding the nature
of external realities.

The Fifth Argument (or Trope) is that based on
positions, distances, and locations; for owing to each
of these the same objects appear different; for
example, the same porch when viewed from one of
its corners appears curtailed, but viewed from the
middle symmetrical on all sides; and the same ship
seems at a distance to be small and stationary, but
from close at hand large and in motion; and the same
tower from a distance appears round but from a near
point quadrangular.

These effects are due to distances; among effects
due to locations are the following: the light of a lamp
appears dim in the sun but bright in the dark; and
the same oar bent when in the water but straight
when out of the water; and the egg soft when inside
the fowl but hard when in the air; and the jacinth 
fluid when in the lynx but hard when in the air;
and the coral soft when in the sea but hard when in
the air’; and sound seems to differ in quality according
as it is produced in a pipe, or in a flute, or simply in
the air.

Effects due to positions are such as these: the same
painting when laid flat appears smooth, but when
inclined forward at a certain angle it seems to have
recesses and prominences. The necks of doves, also,
appear different in hue according to the differences in
the angle of inclination.

Since, then, all apparent objects are viewed in a
certain place, and from a certain distance, or in a
certain position, and each of these conditions produces
a great divergency in the sense-impressions, as we
mentioned above, we shall be compelled by this Mode
also to end up in suspension of judgement. For in
fact anyone who purposes to give the preference to
any of these impressions will be attempting the
impossible.

For if he shall deliver his judgement simply and without 
proof, he will be discredited; and should he, on the other 
hand, desire to adduce proof, he will confute himself if 
he says that the proof is false, while if he asserts that
the proof is true he will be asked for a proof of its truth, 
and again for a proof of this latter proof, since it also must 
be true, and so on ad infinitum. But to produce proofs to infinity is
impossible;

so that neither by the use of proofs will
he be able to prefer one sense-impression to another.
If, then, one cannot hope to pass judgement on the
afore-mentioned impressions either with or without
proof, the conclusion we are driven to is suspension;
for while we can, no doubt, state the nature which
each object appears to possess as viewed in a certain
position or at a certain distance or in a certain place,
what its real nature is we are, for the foregoing 
reasons, unable to declare.

The Sixth Mode is that based on admixtures, by
which we conclude that, because none of the real
objects affects our senses by itself but always in
conjunction with something else, though we may
possibly be able to state the nature of the resultant
mixture formed by the external object and that
along with which it is perceived, we shall not be able
to say what is the exact nature of the external
reality in itself. That none of the external objects
affects our senses by itself but always in conjunction
with something else, and that, in consequence, it
assumes a different appearance, is, I imagine, quite
obvious.

Thus, our own complexion is of one hue in warm air, 
of another in cold, and we should not be able to say 
what our complexion really is, but only what it looks 
like in conjunction with each of these conditions. And 
the same sound appears of one sort in conjunction with 
rare air and of another sort with dense air; and odours are
more pungent in a hot bath-room or in the sun than in chilly 
air; and a body is light when immersed in water but
heavy when surrounded by air.

But to pass on from the subject of external 
admixture,—our eyes contain within themselves both
membranes and liquids. Since, then, the objects of
vision are not perceived apart from these, they will
not be apprehended with exactness; for what we perceive 
is the resultant mixture, and because of this the
sufferers from jaundice see everything yellow, and
those with blood-shot eyes reddish like blood. And
since the same sound seems of one quality in open
places, of another in narrow and winding places, and
different in clear air and in murky air, it is probable
that we do not apprehend the sound in its real
purity; for the ears have crooked and narrow passages, 
which are also befogged by vaporous effluvia
which are said to be emitted by the regions of the
head.

Moreover, since there reside substances in the 
nostrils and in the organs of taste, we apprehend the
objects of taste and of smell in conjunction with
these and not in their real purity. So that, because
of these admixtures, the senses do not apprehend the
exact quality of the external real objects.

Nor yet does the mind apprehend it, since, in the
first place, its guides, which are the senses, go wrong;
and probably, too, the mind itself adds a certain
admixture of its own to the messages conveyed by the
senses; for we observe that there are certain humours
present in each of the regions which the Dogmatists
regard as the seat of the ‟Ruling Principle” —
whether it be the brain or the heart, or in whatever
part of the creature one chooses to locate it. Thus,
according to this Mode also we see that, owing to
our inability to make any statement about the real
nature of external objects, we are compelled to
suspend judgement.

The Seventh Mode is that based, as we said, on the
quantity and constitution of the underlying objects,
meaning generally by ‟constitution” the manner of
composition. And it is evident that by this Mode
also we are compelled to suspend judgement concerning 
the real nature of the objects. Thus, for example,
the filings of a goat’s horn appear white when viewed
simply by themselves and without combination, but
when combined in the substance of the horn they
look black. And silver filings appear black when they
are by themselves, but when united to the whole
mass they are sensed as white.

And chips of the marble of Taenarum seem white when planed, 
but in combination with the whole block they appear yellow. 
And pebbles when scattered apart appear rough, but when 
combined in a heap they produce the sensation of softness. 
And hellebore if applied in a fine and powdery state produces 
suffocation, but not so when it is coarse.

And wine strengthens us when drunk in moderate quantity, 
but when too much is taken it paralyses the body. So 
likewise food exhibits different effects according to the 
quantity consumed; for instance, it frequently upsets the 
body with indigestion and attacks of purging because
of the large quantity taken.

Therefore in these cases, too, we shall be able to 
describe the quality of the shaving of the horn and 
of the compound made up of many shavings, and that 
of the particle of silver and of the compound of many
particles, and that of the sliver of Taenarean marble 
and of the compound of many such small pieces, and the 
relative qualities of the pebbles, the hellebore, the 
wine and the food,—but when it comes to the independent 
and real nature of the objects, this we shall be unable
to describe because of the divergency in the sense-impressions 
which is due to the combinations.

As a general rule, it seems that wholesome things
become harmful when used in immoderate quantities,
and things that seem hurtful when taken to excess
cause no harm when in minute quantities. What we
observe in regard to the effects of medicines is the
best evidence in support of our statement; for there
the exact blending of the simple drugs makes the
compound wholesome, but when the slightest oversight 
is made in the measuring, as sometimes happens,
the compound is not only unwholesome but frequently
even most harmful and deleterious.

Thus the argument from quantities and compositions 
causes confusion as to the real nature of the external 
substances. Probably, therefore, this Mode also will
bring us round to suspension of judgement, as we are
unable to make any absolute statement concerning
the real nature of external objects.

The Eighth Mode is that based on relativity; and 
by it we conclude that, since all things are relative,
we shall suspend judgement as to what things are
absolutely and really existent. But this point we
must notice—that here as elsewhere we use the term
‟are” for the term ‟appear,” and what we virtually
mean is ‟all things appear relative.” And this statement 
is twofold, implying, firstly, relation to the
thing which judges (for the external object which is
judged appears in relation to that thing), and, in a
second sense, relation to the accompanying percepts,
for instance the right side in relation to the left.

Indeed, we have already argued that all things are
relative—for example, with respect to the thing which
judges, it is in relation to some one particular animal
or man or sense that each object appears, and in
relation to such and such a circumstance; and with
respect to the concomitant percepts, each object
appears in relation to some one particular admixture
or mode or combination or quantity or position.

There are also special arguments to prove the
relativity of all things, in this way: Do things which
exist ‟differentially” differ from relative things or
not? If they do not differ, then they too are relative;
but if they differ, then, since everything which differs
is relative to something (for it has its name from its
relation to that from which it differs), things which
exist differentially are relative.

Again,—of existing things some, according to the Dogmatists, 
are summa genera, others infimae species, others both genera 
and species; and all these are relative; therefore all things 
are relative. Further, some existing things are ‟pre-evident,” 
as they say, others non-evident; and the apparent things are 
significant, but the non-evident signified by the apparent; 
for according to them ‟the things apparent are the vision of 
the non-evident.” But the significant and the signified are 
relative; therefore all things are relative.

Moreover, some existent things are similar,
others dissimilar, and some equal, others unequal;
and these are relative; therefore all things are relative. 
And even he who asserts that not all things
are relative confirms the relativity of all things, since
by his arguments against us he shows that the very
statement ‟not all things are relative” is relative to
ourselves, and not universal.

When, however, we have thus established that all 
things are relative, we are plainly left with the 
conclusion that we shall not be able to state what is the
nature of each of the objects in its own real purity,
but only what nature it appears to possess in its
relative character. Hence it follows that we must
suspend judgement concerning the real nature of the
objects.

The Mode which, as we said, comes Ninth in order 
is based on constancy or rarity of occurrence,
and we shall explain it as follows. The sun is, of
course, much more amazing than a comet; yet
because we see the sun constantly but the comet
rarely we are so amazed by the comet that we even
regard it as a divine portent, while the sun causes
no amazement at all. If, however, we were to conceive 
of the sun as appearing but rarely and setting
rarely, and illuminating everything all at once and
throwing everything into shadow suddenly, then we
should experience much amazement at the sight.

An earthquake also does not cause the same alarm 
in those who experience it for the first time and those
who have grown accustomed to such things. How
much amazement, also, does the sea excite in the
man who sees it for the first time! And indeed the
beauty of a human body thrills us more at the first
sudden view than when it becomes a customary
spectacle. Rare things too we count as precious,
but not what is familiar to us and easily got.

Thus,if we should suppose water to be rare, how much more
precious it would appear to us than all the things
which are accounted precious! Or if we should
imagine gold to be simply scattered in quantities
over the earth like stones, to whom do we suppose
it would then be precious and worth hoarding?

Since then, owing to the frequency or rarity of
their occurrence, the same things seem at one time
to be amazing or precious and at another time nothing
of the sort, we infer that though we shall be able
perhaps to say what nature appears to belong to each
of these things in virtue of its frequent or rare
occurrence, we are not able to state what nature
absolutely belongs to each of the external objects.
So because of this Mode also we suspend judgement
regarding them.

There is a Tenth Mode, which is mainly concerned 
with Ethics, being based on rules of conduct, habits,
laws, legendary beliefs, and dogmatic conceptions.
A rule of conduct is a choice of a way of life,
or of a particular action, adopted by one person
or many—by Diogenes, for instance, or the
Laconians.

A law is a written contract amongst the members of a 
State, the transgressor of which is punished. A habit or 
custom (the terms are equivalent) is the joint adoption 
of a certain kind of action by a number of men, the transgressor
of which is not actually punished; for example, the law 
proscribes adultery, and custom with us forbids intercourse 
with a woman in public.

Legendary belief is the acceptance of unhistorical and
fictitious events, such as, amongst others, the legends 
about Cronos; for these stories win credence with many. 
Dogmatic conception is the acceptance of a fact which
seems to be established by analogy or some form of 
demonstration, as, for example, that atoms are the 
elements of existing things, or homoeomeries, or 
minima, or something else.

And each of these we oppose now to itself, and now
to each of the others. For example, we oppose habit
to habit in this way: some of the Ethiopians tattoo
their children, but we do not; and while the Persians
think it seemly to wear a brightly dyed dress reaching 
to the feet, we think it unseemly; and whereas
the Indians have intercourse with their women in
public, most other races regard this as shameful.

And law we oppose to law in this way: among the Romans
the man who renounces his father’s property does
not pay his father’s debts, but among the Rhodians
he always pays them; and among the Scythian
Tauri it was a law that strangers should be sacrificed
to Artemis, but with us it is forbidden to slay a
human being at the altar.

And we oppose rule of conduct to rule of conduct, as 
when we oppose the rule of Diogenes to that of Aristippus 
or that of the Laconians to that of the Italians. And we 
oppose legendary belief to legendary belief when we say
that whereas in one story the father of men and gods
is alleged to be Zeus, in another he is Oceanos—
‟Ocean sire of the gods, and Tethys the mother
that bare them.”

And we oppose dogmatic conceptions to one another 
when we say that some declare that there is one 
element only, others an infinite number; some that 
the soul is mortal, others that it is immortal; and 
some that human affairs are controlled by divine 
Providence, others without Providence.

And we oppose habit to the other things, as for
instance to law when we say that amongst the
Persians it is the habit to indulge in intercourse with
males, but amongst the Romans it is forbidden by
law to do so; and that, whereas with us adultery is
forbidden, amongst the Massagetae it is traditionally
regarded as an indifferent custom, as Eudoxus of
Cnidos relates in the first book of his Travels; and
that, whereas intercourse with a mother is forbidden
in our country, in Persia it is the general custom to
form such marriages; and also among the Egyptians
men marry their sisters, a thing forbidden by law
amongst us.

And habit is opposed to rule of conduct
when, whereas most men have intercourse with their
own wives in retirement, Crates did it in public
with Hipparchia; and Diogenes went about with one
shoulder bare, whereas we dress in the customary
manner.

It is opposed also to legendary belief, as
when the legends say that Cronos devoured his own
children, though it is our habit to protect our children;
and whereas it is customary with us to revere the
gods as being good and immune from evil, they are
presented by the poets as suffering wounds and
envying one another.

And habit is opposed to dogmatic conception when, whereas it 
is our habit to pray to the gods for good things, Epicurus 
declares that the Divinity pays no heed to us; and when 
Aristippus considers the wearing of feminine
attire a matter of indifference, though we consider
it a disgraceful thing.

And we oppose rule of conduct to law when,
though there is a law which forbids the striking of
a free or well-born man, the pancratiasts strike one 
another because of the rule of life they follow; and 
when, though homicide is forbidden, gladiators destroy 
one another for the same reason.

And we oppose legendary belief to rule of conduct when we
say that the legends relate that Heracles in the house
of Omphale ‟toiled at the spinning of wool, enduring 
slavery's burden,” and did things which no one would have 
chosen to do even in a moderate degree, whereas the rule 
of life of Heracles was a noble one.

And we oppose rule of conduct to dogmatic conception 
when, whereas athletes covet glory as something good 
and for its sake undertake a toilsome rule of life, 
many of the philosophers dogmatically assert that 
glory is a worthless thing.

And we oppose law to legendary belief when the poets 
represent the gods as commiting adultery and practising 
intercourse with males, whereas the law with us forbids 
such actions;

and we oppose it to dogmatic conception when Chrysippus 
says that intercourse with mothers or sisters is a thing 
indifferent, whereas the law forbids such things.

And we oppose legendary belief to dogmatic conception
when the poets say that Zeus came down and had intercourse 
with mortal women, but amongst the Dogmatists it is 
held that such a thing is impossible;

and again, when the poet relates that because of his 
grief for Sarpedon Zeus ‟let fall upon the earth great 
gouts of blood,” whereas it is a dogma of the philosophers
that the Deity is impassive; and when these same philosophers
demolish the legend of the hippocentaurs, and offer us the 
hippocentaur as a type of unreality.

We might indeed have taken many other examples 
in connexion with each of the antitheses above
mentioned; but in a concise account like ours, these
will be sufficient. Only, since by means of this Mode
also so much divergency is shown to exist in objects,
we shall not be able to state what character belongs
to the object in respect of its real essence, but only
what belongs to it in respect of this particular rule of
conduct, or law, or habit, and so on with each of the
rest. So because of this Mode also we are compelled
to suspend judgement regarding the real nature of
external objects. And thus by means of all the Ten
Modes we are finally led to suspension of judgement.

The later Sceptics hand down Five Modes leading 
to suspension, namely these: the first based on
discrepancy, the second on regress ad infinitum, 
the third on relativity, the fourth on hypothesis, 
the fifth on circular reasoning.

That based on discrepancy leads us to find that 
with regard to the object presented there has 
arisen both amongst ordinary people and amongst 
the philosophers an interminable conflict because 
of which we are unable either to choose a thing or 
reject it, and so fall back on suspension.

The Mode based upon regress ad infinitum is that
whereby we assert that the thing adduced as a
proof of the matter proposed needs a further 
proof, and this again another, and so on ad 
infinitum, so that the consequence is suspension, 
as we possess no starting-point for our argument.

The Mode based upon relativity, as we have already
said, is that whereby the object has such or such 
an appearance in relation to the subject judging 
and to the concomitant percepts, but as to its 
real nature we suspend judgement.

We have the Mode based on hypothesis when the 
Dogmatists, being forced to recede ad infinitum, 
take as their starting-point something which they
do not establish by argument but claim to assume
as granted simply and without demonstration.

The Mode of circular reasoning is the form used 
when the proof itself which ought to establish the 
matter of inquiry requires confirmation derived 
from that matter; in this case, being unable to 
assume either in order to establish the other, we
suspend judgement about both. 
 That every matter of inquiry admits of being
brought under these Modes we shall show briefly in
this way.

The matter proposed is either a sense-object or a
thought-object, but whichever it is, it is an object 
of controversy; for some say that only sensibles are 
true, others only intelligibles, others that some 
sensible and some intelligible objects are true. 
Will they then assert that the controversy can or 
cannot be decided? If they say it cannot, we have 
it granted that we must suspend judgement; for concerning 
matters of dispute which admit of no decision it is 
impossible to make an assertion. But if they say that 
it can be decided, we ask by what is it to be decided.

For example, in the case of the sense- object 
(for we shall base our argument on it first), 
is it to be decided by a sense-object or a thought-object? 
For if they say by a sense-object, since we are inquiring 
about sensibles that object itself also will require 
another to confirm it; and if that too is to be a sense-object, 
it likewise will require another for its confirmation, and
so on ad infinitum.

And if the sense-object shall have to be decided by a 
thought-object, then, since thought-objects also are 
controverted, this being an object of thought will 
need examination and confirmation. Whence then
will it gain confirmation? If from an intelligible
object, it will suffer a similar regress ad infinitum;
and if from a sensible object, since an intelligible
was adduced to establish the sensible and a sensible
to establish the intelligible, the Mode of circular
reasoning is brought in.

If, however, our disputant, by way of escape from
this conclusion, should claim to assume as granted
and without demonstration some postulate for the
demonstration of the next steps of his argument,
then the Mode of hypothesis will be brought in,
which allows no escape. For if the author of the
hypothesis is worthy of credence, we shall be no
less worthy of credence every time that we make
the opposite hypothesis. Moreover, if the author
of the hypothesis assumes what is true he causes
it to be suspected by assuming it by hypothesis
rather than after proof; while if it is false, the
foundation of his argument will be rotten.

Further, if hypothesis conduces at all to proof, let the 
subject of inquiry itself be assumed and not some other 
thing which is merely a means to establish the actual
subject of the argument ; but if it is absurd to assume
the subject of inquiry, it will also be absurd to assume
that upon which it depends.

It is also plain that all sensibles are relative; for
they are relative to those who have the sensations.
Therefore it is apparent that whatever sensible object
is presented can easily be referred to one of the Five
Modes. And concerning the intelligible object we
argue similarly. For if it should be said that it is a
matter of unsettled controversy, the necessity of our
suspending judgement will be granted.

And if, on the other hand, the controversy admits of decision, 
then if the decision rests on an intelligible object we shall
be driven to the regress ad infinitum, and to circular reasoning 
if it rests on a sensible; for since the sensible again is 
controverted and cannot be decided by means of itself 
because of the regress ad infinitum, it will require the 
intelligible object, just as also the intelligible will 
require the sensible.

For these reasons, again, he who assumes anything by
hypothesis will be acting illogically. Moreover,
objects of thought, or intelligibles, are relative; for
they are so named on account of their relation to
the person thinking, and if they had really possessed
the nature they are said to possess, there would
have been no controversy about them. Thus the
intelligible also is referred to the Five Modes, so
that in all cases we are compelled to suspend judgement 
concerning the object presented. 
 Such then are the Five Modes handed down amongst
the later Sceptics; but they propound these not by
way of superseding the Ten Modes but in order to
expose the rashness of the Dogmatists with more
variety and completeness by means of the Five in
conjunction with the Ten.

They hand down also Two other Modes leading 
to suspension of judgement. Since every object of
apprehension seems to be apprehended either through
itself or through another object, by showing that
nothing is apprehended either through itself or
through another thing, they introduce doubt, as they
suppose, about everything. That nothing is apprehended 
through itself is plain, they say, from the
controversy which exists amongst the physicists 
regarding, I imagine, all things, both sensibles and
intelligibles; which controversy admits of no settlement
because we can neither employ a sensible
nor an intelligible criterion, since every criterion
we may adopt is controverted and therefore discredited.

And the reason why they do not allow that 
anything is apprehended through something
else is this: If that through which an object is
apprehended must always itself be apprehended
through some other thing, one is involved in a process 
of circular reasoning or in regress ad infinitum.
And if, on the other hand, one should choose to
assume that the thing through which another object
is apprehended is itself apprehended through itself,
this is refuted by the fact that, for the reasons already
stated, nothing is apprehended through itself. But
as to how what conflicts with itself can possibly be
apprehended either through itself or through some
other thing we remain in doubt, so long as the criterion
of truth or of apprehension is not apparent, and signs,
even apart from demonstration, are rejected, as we
shall discover in our next Book. 
 For the present, however, it will suffice to have said
thus much concerning the Modes leading to suspension 
of judgement.

Just as we teach the traditional Modes leading to
suspense of judgement, so likewise some Sceptics
propound Modes by which we express doubt about
the particular ‟aetiologies,” or theories of causation,
and thus pull up the Dogmatists because of the special
pride they take in these theories. Thus Aenesidemus
furnishes us with Eight Modes by which, as he thinks,
he tests and exposes the unsoundness of every dogmatic 
theory of causation.

Of these the First, he says, is that which shows that, 
since aetiology as a whole deals with the non-apparent, 
it is unconfirmed by any agreed evidence derived from 
appearances. The Second Mode shows how often, when there 
is ample scope for ascribing the object of investigation
to a variety of causes, some of them account for it 
in one way only.

The Third shows how to orderly events they assign 
causes which exhibit no order. The Fourth shows how, 
when they have grasped the way in which appearances 
occur, they assume that they have also apprehended 
how non-apparent things occur, whereas, though 
the non-apparent may possibly be realized in a 
similar way to the appearances, possibly they 
may not be realized in a similar way but
in a peculiar way of their own.

In the Fifth Mode it is shown how practically all 
these theorists assign causes according to their 
own particular hypotheses about the elements, and 
not according to any commonly agreed methods. In 
the Sixth it is shown how they frequently admit 
only such facts as can be explained by their own 
theories, and dismiss facts which conflict therewith 
though possessing equal probability.

The Seventh shows how they often assign causes which 
conflict not only with appearances but also with their 
own hypotheses. The Eighth shows that often, when there 
is equal doubt about things seemingly apparent and things
under investigation, they base their doctrine about
things equally doubtful upon things equally doubtful.

Nor is it impossible, he adds, that the overthrow of
some of their theories of causation should be referred
to certain mixed Modes which are dependent on the
foregoing. 
 Possibly, too, the Five Modes of suspension may
suffice as against the aetiologies. For if a person
propounds a cause, it will either be or not be in accord
with all the philosophical systems and with Scepticism
and with appearances. Probably, however, it is
impracticable to propound a cause in accord with all
these, since all things, whether apparent or non-
evident, are matters of controversy.

But if, on the other hand, the cause propounded be not 
in accord therewith, the theorist will be asked in turn 
for the cause of this cause, and if he assumes an apparent
cause for an apparent, or a non-evident for a non-
evident, he will be involved in the regress ad infinitum,
or reduced to arguing in a circle if he grounds each
cause in turn on another. And if at any point he
makes a stand, either he will state that the cause is
well-grounded so far as relates to the previous 
admissions, thus introducing relativity and destroying
its claim to absolute reality, or he will make some
assumption ex hypothesi and will be stopped by us.
So by these Modes also it is, no doubt, possible to
expose the rashness of the Dogmatists in their
aetiologies.

And because when we make use of these Modes
and those which lead to suspension of judgement we
give utterance to certain expressions indicative of
our sceptical attitude and tone of mind—such as
‟Not more,” ‟Nothing must be determined,” and
others of the kind—it will be our next task to discuss
these in order. So let us begin with the expression
‟Not more.”

This expression, then, we sometimes enunciate
in the form I have stated but sometimes in the form
‟Nowise more.” For we do not, as some suppose,
adopt the form ‟Not more” in specific inquiries
and ‟Nowise more” in generic inquiries, but we
enunciate both ‟Not more” and ‟Nowise more”
indifferently, and we shall discuss them now as identical
expressions. This expression, then, is elliptical. For
just as when we say ‟a double” we are implicitly
saying ‟a double hearth,” and when we say ‟a
square” we are implicitly saying ‟a square road-
way,” so when we say ‟Not more” we are implicitly
saying ‟Not this more than that, up than down.”

Some of the Sceptics, however, in place of the ‟Not”
adopt the form ”(For) what this more than that,”
taking the ‟what” to denote, in this case, cause,
so that the meaning is ‟For what reason this more
than that?” And it is a common practice to use
questions instead of assertions, as for example—‟The
bride of Zeus, what mortal knows her not?” And
also assertions in the place of questions; for instance
—‟I am inquiring where Dion lives,” and ‟I ask
you what reason there is for showing surprise at a
poet.” And further, the use of ‟What” instead of
‟For what reason” is found in Menander, ‟(For)
what was I left behind?”

And the expression ‟Not more this than that” indicates 
also our feeling, whereby we come to end in equipoise 
because of the equipollence of the opposed objects; 
and by ‟equipollence” we mean equality in respect of 
what seems probable to us, and by ‟opposed” we mean in
general conflicting, and by ‟equipoise” refusal of
assent to either alternative.

Then as to the formula ‟Nowise more,” even
though it exhibits the character of a form of assent
or of denial, we do not employ it in this way, but we
take it in a loose and inexact sense, either in place
of a question or in place of the phrase ‟I know not
to which of these things I ought to assent, and to
which I ought not.” For our aim is to indicate what
appears to us; while as to the expression by which
we indicate this we are indifferent. This point, too,
should be noticed—that we utter the expression
‟Nowise more” not as positively affirming that it
really is true and certain, but as stating in regard to
it also what appears to us.

Concerning non-assertion what we say is this. The
term ‟assertion” has two senses, general and special;
used in the general sense it indicates affirmation or
negation, as for example ‟It is day,” ‟It is not
day;” in its special sense it indicates affirmation
only, and in this sense negations are not termed
assertions. Non-assertion, then, is avoidance of 
assertion in the general sense in which it is 
said to include both affirmation and negation, 
so that non-assertion is a mental condition of ours 
because of which we refuse either to affirm or to 
deny anything.

Hence it is plain that we adopt non-assertion also not as
though things are in reality of such a kind as wholly
to induce non-assertion, but as indicating that we
now, at the time of uttering it, are in this condition
regarding the problems now before us. It must
also be borne in mind that what, as we say, we
neither posit nor deny, is some one of the dogmatic
statements made about what is non-apparent; for
we yield to those things which move us emotionally
and drive us compulsorily to assent.

The formulae ‟perhaps” and ‟perhaps not,” and 
‟possibly” and ‟possibly not,” and ‟maybe” and
‟maybe not,” we adopt in place of ‟perhaps it is
and perhaps it is not,” and ‟possibly it is and
possibly it is not,” and ‟maybe it is and maybe
it is not,” so that for the sake of conciseness
we adopt the phrase ‟possibly not” instead of
‟possibly it is not,” and ‟maybe not” instead of
‟maybe it is not,” and ‟perhaps not” instead of
‟perhaps it is not.”

But here again we do not fight about phrases nor do we 
inquire whether the phrases indicate realities, but we 
adopt them, as I said, in a loose sense. Still it is evident, 
as I think, that these expressions are indicative of 
non-assertion. Certainly the person who says ‟perhaps 
it is” is implicitly affirming also the seemingly contradictory 
phrase ‟perhaps it is not” by his refusal to make the positive 
assertion that ‟it is.” And the same applies to all the 
other cases.

The phrase ‟I suspend judgement” we adopt in
place of ‟I am unable to say which of the objects
presented I ought to believe and which I ought to
disbelieve,” indicating that the objects appear to us
equal as regards credibility and incredibility. As to
whether they are equal we make no positive assertion; 
but what we state is what appears to us in
regard to them at the time of observation. And the
term ‟suspension” is derived from the fact of the
mind being held up or ‟suspended” so that it neither
affirms nor denies anything owing to the equipollence
of the matters in question.

Regarding the phrase ‟I determine nothing” this
is what we say. We hold that ‟to determine” is
not simply to state a thing but to put forward
something non-evident combined with assent. For
in this sense, no doubt, it will be found that
the Sceptic determines nothing, not even the very
proposition ‟I determine nothing;” for this is not a
dogmatic assumption, that is to say assent to something 
non-evident, but an expression indicative of our
own mental condition. So whenever the Sceptic says
‟I determine nothing,” what he means is ‟I am
now in such a state of mind as neither to affirm
dogmatically nor deny any of the matters now in
question.” And this he says simply by way of announcing 
undogmatically what appears to himself regarding 
the matters presented, not making any confident
declaration, but just explaining his own state of mind.

Indetermination is a state of mind in which we
neither deny nor affirm any of the matters which are
subjects of dogmatic inquiry, that is to say, non-
evident. So whenever the Sceptic says ‟All things
are undetermined,” he takes the word ‟are” in the
sense of ‟appear to him,” and by ‟all things” he
means not existing things but such of the non-evident
matters investigated by the Dogmatists as he has
examined, and by ‟undetermined” he means not
superior in point of credibility or incredibility to
things opposed, or in any way conflicting.

And just as the man who says ”(I) walk about” is 
potentially saying ‟I walk about,” so he who says 
‟All are undetermined” conveys also, as we hold, the meaning 
‟so far as relates to me,” or ‟as appears to me,”
so that the statement amounts to this—‟All the
matters of dogmatic inquiry which I have examined
appear to me to be such that no one of them is
preferable to the one in conflict with it in respect
of credibility or incredibility.”

We adopt a similar attitude when we say ‟All
things are non-apprehensible.” For we give a
similar explanation of the word ‟all,” and we
similarly supply the words ‟to me,” so that the
meaning conveyed is this—‟All the non-apparent
matters of dogmatic inquiry which I have investigated 
appear to me non-apprehensible.” And
this is the utterance not of one who is positively
asserting that the matters investigated by the
Dogmatists are really of such a nature as to be non-
apprehensible, but of one who is announcing his own
state of mind, ‟wherein,” he says, ‟I conceive that up
till now I myself have apprehended nothing owing to
the equipollence of the opposites; and therefore also
nothing that is brought forward to overthrow our
position seems to me to have any bearing on what we
announce.”

Both the expressions ‟I am non-apprehensive”
and ‟I apprehend not” are indicative of a personal
state of mind, in which the Sceptic, for the time being,
avoids affirming or denying any non-evident matter
of inquiry, as is obvious from what we have said above
concerning the other expressions.

When we say ‟To every argument an equal argument
is opposed,” we mean ‟to every argument”
that has been investigated by us, and the word
‟argument” we use not in its simple sense, but of
that which establishes a point dogmatically (that is to
say with reference to what is non-evident) and 
establishes it by any method, and not necessarily by means 
of premisses and a conclusion. We say ‟equal”
with reference to credibility or incredibility, and we
employ the word ‟opposed” in the general sense of
‟conflicting;” and we supply therewith in thought
the phrase ‟as appears to me.”

So whenever I say ‟To every argument an equal argument is 
opposed,” what I am virtually saying is ‟To every argument 
investigated by me which establishes a point dogmatically, 
it seems to me there is opposed another argument, establishing 
a point dogmatically, which is equal to the first in respect 
of credibility and incredibility;” so that the utterance of 
the phrase is not a piece of dogmatism, but the announcement of
a human state of mind which is apparent to the person
experiencing it.

But some also utter the expression in the form 
‟To every argument an equal argument is to be
opposed,” intending to give the injunction ‟To
every argument which establishes a point dogmatically
let us oppose an argument which investigates dogmatically,
equal to the former in respect of credibility and incredibility, 
and conflicting therewith;” for they mean their words 
to be addressed to the Sceptic, although they use the 
infinitive form ‟to be opposed” instead of the imperative 
‟let us oppose.”

And they address this injunction to the Sceptic lest 
haply, through being misled by the Dogmatist, he may give
up the Sceptic search, and through precipitancy
miss the ‟quietude” approved by the Sceptics,
which they—as we said above —believe to be dependent 
on universal suspension of judgement.

In a preliminary outline it will be sufficient to have 
explained the expressions now set forth, especially
since it is possible to explain the rest by deductions
from the foregoing. For, in regard to all the Sceptic
expressions, we must grasp first the fact that we make
no positive assertion respecting their absolute truth,
since we say that they may possibly be confuted by
themselves, seeing that they themselves are included
in the things to which their doubt applies, just as
aperient drugs do not merely eliminate the humours
from the body, but also expel themselves along with
the humours.

And we also say that we employ them not by way of 
authoritatively explaining the things with reference 
to which we adopt them, but without precision and, if 
you like, loosely; for it does not become the Sceptic 
to wrangle over expressions, and besides it is to our 
advantage that even to these expressions no absolute 
significance should be ascribed, but one that is relative 
and relative to the Sceptics.

Besides this we must also remember that we do not employ 
them universally about all things, but about those which 
are non-evident and are objects of dogmatic inquiry; and 
that we state what appears to us and do not make any 
positive declarations as to the real nature of external 
objects; for I think that, as a result of this, every 
sophism directed against a Sceptic expression can be 
refuted.

And now that we have reviewed the idea or purpose
of Scepticism and its divisions, and the criterion and
the end, and the modes, too, of suspension, and have
discussed the Sceptic expressions, and have thus made
clear the character of Scepticism, our next task is,
we suppose, to explain briefly the distinction which
exists between it and the philosophic systems which
lie next to it, in order that we may more clearly
understand the ‟suspensive” Way of thought. Let
us begin with the Heracleitean philosophy.

Now that this latter differs from our Way of thought
is plain at once; for Heracleitus makes dogmatic
statements about many non-evident things, whereas
we, as has been said, do not. It is true that Aenesidemus 
and his followers used to say that the Sceptic
Way is a road leading up to the Heracleitean philosophy, 
since to hold that the same thing is the subject
of opposite appearances is a preliminary to holding
that it is the subject of opposite realities, and while
the Sceptics say that the same thing is the subject
of opposite appearances, the Heracleiteans go on from
this to assert their reality. But in reply to them we
declare that the view about the same thing having
opposite appearances is not a dogma of the Sceptics
but a fact which is experienced not by the Sceptics
alone but also by the rest of philosophers and by
all mankind;

for certainly no one would venture to say that honey does 
not taste sweet to people in sound health or that it does 
not taste bitter to those suffering from jaundice; so that 
the Heracleiteans start from the general preconception of 
mankind, just as we also do and probably all the other 
philosophies. Consequently, if they had derived their 
theory that the same thing is the subject of opposite 
realities from one of the Sceptic formulae, such as ‟All 
things are non-apprehensible,” or ‟I determine nothing,” 
or some similar expression, probably they would have 
reached the conclusion they assert; but since their 
starting-points are impressions experienced not by us 
only but by all the other philosophers and by
ordinary people, why should anyone declare that our
Way of thought is a road to the Heracleitean philosophy
any more than any of the other philosophies or even
than the ordinary view, since we all make use of the
same common material?

Rather it is the case that the Sceptic Way so far 
from being an aid to the knowledge of the Heracleitean
philosophy is actually an obstacle thereto, seeing that
the Sceptic decries all the dogmatic statements of
Heracleitus as rash utterances, contradicting his
‟Ecpyrosis,” and contradicting his view that the
same thing is the subject of opposite realities, and in
respect of every dogma of Heracleitus scoffing at his
dogmatic precipitancy, and constantly repeating, as
I said before, his own ‟I apprehend not” and ‟I
determine nothing,” which are in conflict with the
Heracleiteans. Now it is absurd to say that a 
conflicting Way is a road to the system with which 
it is in conflict; therefore it is absurd to say that 
the Sceptic Way is a road leading to the Heracleitean 
philosophy.

But it is also said that the Democritean philosophy
has something in common with Scepticism,
since it seems to use the same material as we; for
from the fact that honey appears sweet to some and
bitter to others, Democritus, as they say, infers that
it really is neither sweet nor bitter, and pronounces
in consequence the formula ‟Not more,” which is
a Sceptic formula. The Sceptics, however, and the
School of Democritus employ the expression ‟Not
more” in different ways; for while they use it to
express the unreality of either alternative, we express
by it our ignorance as to whether both or neither of
the appearances is real.

So that in this respect also we differ, and our difference 
becomes specially evident when Democritus says ‟But in 
verity atoms and void” (for he says ‟In verity” in place 
of ‟In truth”); and that he differs from us when he says 
that the atoms and the void are in truth subsistent, 
although he starts out from the incongruity of appearances, 
it is superfluous, I think, to state.

Some assert that the Cyrenaic doctrine is identical 
with Scepticism since it too affirms that only mental
states are apprehended. But it differs from Scepticism
inasmuch as it says that the End is pleasure and the
smooth motion of the flesh, whereas we say it is
‟quietude,” which is the opposite of their End; for
whether pleasure be present or not present the man
who positively affirms pleasure to be the End undergoes 
perturbations, as I have argued in my chapter
‟Of the End.” Further, whereas we suspend
judgement, so far as regards the essence of external
objects, the Cyrenaics declare that those objects
possess a real nature which is inapprehensible.

Protagoras also holds that ‟Man is the measure of all 
things, of existing things that they exist, and of 
non-existing things that they exist not;” and by 
‟measure” he means the criterion, and by ‟things” 
the objects, so that he is virtually asserting that 
‟Man is the criterion of all objects, of those which 
exist that they exist, and of those which exist not 
that they exist not.” And consequently he posits only 
what appears to each individual, and thus he introduces 
relativity.

And for this reason he seems also to have something in 
common with the Pyrrhoneans. Yet he differs from them, 
and we shall perceive the difference when we have 
adequately explained the views of Protagoras. 
 What he states then is this—that matter is in flux,
and as it flows additions are made continuously in the
place of the effluxions, and the senses are transformed
and altered according to the times of life and to all
the other conditions of the bodies.

He says also that the ‟reasons” of all the appearances 
subsist in matter, so that matter, so far as depends 
on itself, is capable of being all those things which 
appear to all. And men, he says, apprehend different 
things at different times owing to their differing 
dispositions; for he who is in a natural state apprehends 
those things subsisting in matter which are able to appear
to those in a natural state, and those who are in a non-
natural state the things which can appear to those in
a non-natural state.

Moreover, precisely the same account applies to the 
variations due to age, and to the sleeping or waking 
state, and to each several kind of condition. Thus, 
according to him, Man becomes the criterion of real 
existences; for all things that appear to men also exist, 
and things that appear to no man have no existence either. 
 We see, then, that he dogmatizes about the fluidity
of matter and also about the subsistence therein of
the ‟reasons” of all appearances, these being non-
evident matters about which we suspend judgement.

Some indeed say that the Academic philosophy is
identical with Scepticism; consequently it shall be
our next task to discuss this statement. 
 According to most people there have been three
Academies—the first and most ancient that of Plato
and his School, the second or middle Academy that
of Arcesilaus, the pupil of Polemo, and his School, the
third or New Academy that of the School of Carneades
and Cleitomachus. Some, however, add as a fourth
that of the School of Philo and Charmidas; and some
even count the School of Antiochus as a fifth.

Beginning, then, with the Old Academy let us consider
how the philosophies mentioned differ from ours . 
 Plato has been described by some as ‟dogmatic,” by
others as ‟dubitative,” and by others again as partly
dogmatic and partly dubitative. For in his exercitatory
discourses, where Socrates is introduced either
as talking playfully with his auditors or as arguing
against sophists, he shows, they say, an exercitatory
and dubitative character; but a dogmatic character
when he is speaking seriously by the mouth either
of Socrates or of Timaeus or of some similar personage.

Now as regards those who describe him as a dogmatist,
or as partly dogmatic and partly dubitative, it would
be superfluous to say anything now; for they themselves 
acknowledge his difference from us. But the
question whether Plato is a genuine Sceptic is one
which we discuss more fully in our ‟Commentaries;” 
but now, in opposition to Menodotus and Aenesidemus
(these being the chief champions of this view),
we declare in brief that when Plato makes statements
about Ideas or about the reality of Providence or 
about the virtuous life being preferable to the vicious, 
he is dogmatizing if he is assenting to these as actual 
truths, while if he is accepting them as more probable 
than not, since thereby he gives a preference to one 
thing over another in point of probability or improbability, 
he throws off the character of a Sceptic; for that such an 
attitude is foreign to us is quite plain from what 
has been said above.

And if Plato does really utter some statements in a 
sceptical way when he is, as they say, ‟exercising,”
that will not make him a Sceptic; for the man that
dogmatizes about a single thing, or ever prefers one
impression to another in point of credibility or 
incredibility, or makes any assertion about any 
non-evident object, assumes the dogmatic character, 
as Timon also shows by his remarks about Xenophanes.

For after praising him repeatedly, so that he even
dedicated to him his Satires, he represented him as
uttering this lamentation—
 
 Would that I too had attained a mind compacted of wisdom,
 Both ways casting my eyes; but the treacherous pathway
 deceived me,
 Old that I was, and as yet unversed in the doubts of the
 Sceptic.
 For in whatever direction I turned my mind in its questing
 All was resolved into One and the Same; All ever-existing
 Into one self-same nature returning shaped itself all ways. 
So on this account he also calls him ‟semi-vain,” and
not perfectly free from vanity, where he says—
 
 Xenophanes semi-vain, derider of Homer’s deceptions,
 Framed him a God far other than Man, self-equal in all ways,
 Safe from shaking or scathe, surpassing thought in his
 thinking. 
He called him ‟semi-vain” as being in some degree
free from vanity, and ‟derider of Homer’s deceptions”
because he censured the deceit mentioned in
Homer.

Xenophanes, contrary to the preconceptions
of all other men, asserted dogmatically that the All
is one, and that God is consubstantial with all things,
and is of spherical form and passionless and unchangeable 
and rational; and from this it is easy to show
how Xenophanes differs from us. However, it is plain
from what has been said that even if Plato evinces
doubt about some matters, yet he cannot be a Sceptic
inasmuch as he shows himself at times either making
assertions about the reality of non-evident objects
or preferring one non-evident thing to another in
point of credibility.

The adherents of the New Academy, although they
affirm that all things are non-apprehensible, yet
differ from the Sceptics even, as seems probable, in
respect of this very statement that all things are
non-apprehensible (for they affirm this positively,
whereas the Sceptic regards it as possible that some
things may be apprehended); but they differ from
us quite plainly in their judgement of things good
and evil. For the Academicians do not describe a
thing as good or evil in the way we do; for they do
so with the conviction that it is more probable that
what they call good is really good rather than the
opposite, and so too in the case of evil, whereas
when we describe a thing as good or evil we do not
add it as our opinion that what we assert is probable,
but simply conform to life undogmatically that we
may not be precluded from activity.

And as regards sense-impressions, we say that they are 
equal in respect of probability and improbability, so 
far as their essence is concerned, whereas they assert
that some impressions are probable, others improbable. 
 And respecting the probable impressions they
make distinctions: some they regard as just simply
probable, others as probable and tested, others as
probable, tested, and ‟irreversible.” For example,
when a rope is lying coiled up in a dark room, to one
who enters hurriedly it presents the simply ‟probable”
appearance of being a serpent;

but to the man who has looked carefully round and 
has investigated the conditions—such as its immobility 
and its colour, and each of its other peculiarities—it
appears as a rope, in accordance with an impression
that is probable and tested. And the impression that
is also ‟irreversible” or incontrovertible is of this
kind. When Alcestis had died, Heracles, it is said,
brought her up again from Hades and showed her to
Admetus, who received an impression of Alcestis that
was probable and tested; since, however, he knew
that she was dead his mind recoiled from its assent
and reverted to unbelief.

So then the philosophers of the New Academy prefer 
the probable and tested impression to the simply 
probable, and to both of these the impression that 
is probable and tested and irreversible. 
 And although both the Academics and the Sceptics
say that they believe some things, yet here too the
difference between the two philosophies is quite plain.
For the word ‟believe” has different meanings:

it means not to resist but simply to follow without
any strong impulse or inclination, as the boy is said
to believe his tutor; but sometimes it means to
assent to a thing of deliberate choice and with a
kind of sympathy due to strong desire, as when
the incontinent man believes him who approves of
an extravagant mode of life. Since, therefore,
Carneades and Cleitomachus declare that a strong
inclination accompanies their credence and the
credibility of the object, while we say that our
belief is a matter of simple yielding without any
consent, here too there must be a difference between
us and them.

Furthermore, as regards the End (or aim of life) 
we differ from the New Academy; for whereas the
men who profess to conform to its doctrine use
probability as the guide of life, we live in an undogmatic 
way by following the laws, customs, and natural affections. 
And we might say still more about this distinction 
had it not been that we are aiming at conciseness.

Arcesilaus, however, who was, as we said, the 
president and founder of the Middle Academy,
certainly seems to me to have shared the doctrines of
Pyrrho, so that his Way of thought is almost identical
with ours. For we do not find him making any assertion 
about the reality or unreality of anything, nor
does he prefer any one thing to another in point of
probability or improbability, but suspends judgement
about all. He also says that the End is suspension—
which is accompanied, as we have said, by ‟quietude.”

He declares, too, that suspension regarding particular
objects is good, but assent regarding particulars bad.
Only one might say that whereas we make these
statements not positively but in accordance with what
appears to us, he makes them as statements of real
facts, so that he asserts that suspension in itself 
really is good and assent bad.

And if one ought to credit also what is said about him, 
he appeared at the first glance, they say, to be a 
'Pyrrhonean, but in reality he was a dogmatist; and 
because he used to test his companions by means of 
dubitation to see if they were fitted by nature for 
the reception of the Platonic dogmas, he was thought 
to be a dubitative philosopher, but he actually passed 
on to such of his companions as were naturally gifted 
the dogmas of Plato. And this was why Ariston described 
him as ‟Plato the head of him, Pyrrho the tail, in
the midst Diodorus;” because he employed the
dialectic of Diodorus, although he was actually a
Platonist.

Philo asserts that objects are inapprehensible
so far as concerns the Stoic criterion, that is to say
‟apprehensive impression,” but are apprehensible so
far as concerns the real nature of the objects themselves. 
Moreover, Antiochus actually transferred the Stoa to 
the Academy, so that it was even said of him 
that ‟In the Academy he teaches the Stoic
philosophy;” for he tried to show that the dogmas
of the Stoics are already present in Plato. So that
it is quite plain how the Sceptic ‟Way” differs from
what is called the Fourth Academy and the Fifth.

Since some allege that the Sceptic philosophy
is identical with the Empiricism of the Medical
sect, it must be recognized that inasmuch as that
Empiricism positively affirms the inapprehensibility of
what is non-evident it is not identical with Scepticism
nor would it be consistent in a Sceptic to embrace that
doctrine. He could more easily, in my opinion, adopt
the so-called ‟Method;”

for it alone of the Medical systems appears to avoid rash 
treatment of things non-evident by arbitrary assertions as
to their apprehensibility or non-apprehensibility, and 
following appearances derives from them what seems beneficial, 
in accordance with the practice of the Sceptics. For we stated 
above that the common life, in which the Sceptic also shares, 
is four-fold, one part depending on the directing force of Nature, 
another on the compulsion of the affections, another on the 
tradition of laws and customs, and another on the training 
of the arts.

So then, just as the Sceptic, in virtue of the compulsion 
of the affections, is guided by thirst to drink and by hunger 
to food, and in like manner to other such objects, in the 
same way the Methodical physician is guided by the pathological 
affections to the corresponding remedies—by contraction to 
dilatation, as when one seeks refuge in heat from the contraction 
due to the application of cold, or by fluxion to the stoppage 
of it, as when persons in a hot bath, dripping with perspiration 
and in a relaxed condition, seek to put a stop to it and for this 
reason rush off into the cool air. It is plain, too, that 
conditions which are naturally alien compel us to take measures 
for their removal, seeing that even the dog when it is pricked 
by a thorn proceeds to remove it.

And in short—to avoid exceeding the limits proper to an 
outline of this kind by a detailed enumeration—I suppose 
that all the facts described by the Methodic School can be 
classed as instances of the compulsion of the affections, 
whether natural or against nature. 
 Besides, the use of terms in an undogmatic and
indeterminate sense is common to both systems.

For just as the Sceptic uses the expressions ‟I determine
nothing” and ‟I apprehend nothing,” as we have
said, in an undogmatic sense, even so the Methodic
speaks of ‟generality” and ‟pervade” and the like
in a non-committal way. So also he employs the
term ‟indication” in an undogmatic sense to denote
the guidance derived from the apparent affections, or
symptoms, both natural and contra-natural, for the
discovery of the seemingly appropriate remedies—
as, in fact, I mentioned in regard to hunger and thirst
and the other affections.

Consequently, judging from these and similar indications, 
we should say that the Methodic School of Medicine has 
some affinity with Scepticism; and, when viewed not 
simply by itself, but in comparison with the other 
Medical Schools, it has more affinity than they. 
 And now that we have said thus much concerning
the Schools which seem to stand nearest to that of
the Sceptics, we here bring to a conclusion both our
general account of Scepticism and the First Book of
our ‟Outlines.”

Since we have undertaken this inquiry in criticism 
of the Dogmatists, let us review briefly and in outline
the several divisions of so-called philosophy, when we
have first made reply to those who keep constantly
repeating that the Sceptic is incapable of either
investigating or in any way cognizing the objects
about which they dogmatize.

For they maintain that the Sceptic either apprehends or does not
apprehend the statements made by the Dogmatists;
if, then, he apprehends, how can he be perplexed
about things which he has, as he says, apprehended?
Whereas if he apprehends not, then neither does he
know how to discuss matters which he has not apprehended.

For just as he who is ignorant, for instance, 
of the arguments known as ‟How far reduced” or
‟By two hypotheses,” is unable also to say anything
about them, so the man who does not know each of
the statements made by the Dogmatists is unable to
criticize them concerning matters of which he has no
knowledge. Thus the Sceptic is wholly incapable of
investigating the statements made by the Dogmatists.

Now let those who speak thus make answer and 
tell us in what sense they are now using the term
‟apprehend,” whether simply of mental conception
without the further affirmation of the reality of the
objects under discussion, or with the further assumption 
of the reality of the objects discussed. For
if they say that ‟to apprehend” means, in their
argument, to assent to an ‟apprehensive impression,” 
the apprehensive impression being derived
from a real object and being an imprint or stamp upon
the mind corresponding to the actual object, such as
would not result from what is unreal, then probably
not even they themselves will wish to allow their
inability to investigate things which, in this sense, they
have not apprehended.

Thus, for example, when the 
Stoic criticizes the statement of the Epicurean that
‟Being is divided,” or that ‟God does not foreknow
events in the Universe,” or that ‟Pleasure is the
Good,” has he apprehended or has he not apprehended? 
If he has apprehended these dogmas, by
asserting their real truth he entirely overthrows the
Porch; while if he has not apprehended them, he is
unable to say anything against them.

And we must use a like argument against those 
who issue from any of the other Sects, whenever they
desire to make any critical investigation of the tenets
of those who differ from them in doctrine. 
consequently they are debarred from indulging in any
criticism of one another. Or rather—to avoid talking
nonsense—practically the whole of Dogmatism will
be confounded and the Sceptic philosophy will be
firmly established once it is granted that it is
impossible to inquire regarding an object which is not,
in this sense, apprehended.

For he who makes a
dogmatic statement about a non-evident object will
declare that he is making it either after having
apprehended or after having not apprehended it.
But if he has not apprehended it he will not gain
credence; while if he has apprehended it, he will
say that he has apprehended the object directly and
through itself and owing to the clear impression it
has made on him, or else by means of some kind of
search and inquiry.

But if he shall say that the 
non-evident object has impressed him and has been
apprehended through itself, immediately and clearly,
in this case the object would not be non-evident but
apparent to all men equally, an acknowledged and
uncontroverted fact. But about every single object
that is non-evident there exists amongst them 
endless controversy; so that the Dogmatist who makes
positive assertions about the reality of a non-evident
object cannot have apprehended it because of its
having made on him a direct and clear impression.

If, on the other hand, his apprehension is a result of 
search, how was he in a position to make inquiry
before he had accurately apprehended the object,
without violating our present assumption? For since
the inquiry necessitates as a preliminary the existence
of an accurate apprehension of that which is to be
the subject of inquiry, while the apprehension of the
subject of inquiry demands, in its turn, the previous
existence of a complete inquiry into that subject,
owing to this circular process of reasoning it 
becomes impossible for them either to inquire concerning
things non-evident or to dogmatize; for if some
of them wish to make apprehension their starting-
point we force them to grant that the object must
be investigated before it is apprehended, while if
they start from inquiry we make them admit that
before inquiring they must apprehend the object of
the inquiry, so that for these reasons they can neither
apprehend any non-evident object nor make positive
statements about them. From this there will follow
automatically, as I think, the demolition of the
Dogmatic sophistry and the establishment of the
Suspensive philosophy.

If, however, they say that it is not this kind of
apprehension that ought, in their view, to precede
inquiry, but simply mental conception, then it is no
longer impossible for those who suspend judgement
to inquire about the reality of things non-evident.
For the Sceptic is not, I suppose, prohibited from
mental conception which arises through the reason
itself as a result of passive impressions and clear
appearances and does not at all involve the reality
of the objects conceived; for we conceive, as
they say, not only of real things but also of unreal.
Hence both while inquiring and while conceiving
the Suspensive person continues in the Sceptical
state of mind. For, as has been shown, he assents
to what he experiences by way of subjective
impression, according as that impression appears to
him.

But consider whether, even in this case, the
Dogmatists are not precluded from inquiry. For
to continue the investigation of problems is not
inconsistent in those who confess their ignorance
of their real nature, but only in those who believe
they have an exact knowledge of them; since for
the latter the inquiry has already, as they suppose,
reached its goal, whereas for the former the ground
on which all inquiry is based—namely, the belief
that they have not found the truth—still subsists.

Thus we have to inquire briefly, on the present
occasion, concerning each several division of philosophy 
so called. And since there exists much dispute
amongst the Dogmatists regarding the divisions of
philosophy —some saying there is one division, some
two, some three—and it would not now be
convenient to discuss the question at length, we will
explain fairly and impartially the view of those who
seem to have treated it most fully, and take their
view as the subject of our discourse.

The Stoics, then, and several others, say that there
are three divisions of philosophy, namely, Logic,
Physics, and Ethics; and they begin their teaching
with Logic, although the question of the right 
starting-point is also a matter of much controversy. So
we shall follow them in an undogmatic way; and
since the subject matter of all three divisions requires
testing and a criterion, and the doctrine of the
criterion seems to be included in the division of
Logic, we shall begin with the doctrine of the criterion
and the division of Logic.

But first we must notice that the word ‟criterion”
is used both of that by which, as they say, we judge
of reality and non-reality, and of that which we use
as the guide of life; and our present task is to discuss
the so-called criterion of truth, since we have already
dealt with the criterion in its other sense in our
discourse ‟On Scepticism.”

The criterion, then, with which our argument is
concerned, has three several meanings—the general,
the special, and the most special. In the ‟general”
sense it is used of every standard of apprehension,
and in this sense we speak even of physical organs,
such as sight, as criteria. In the ‟special” sense
it includes every technical standard of apprehension,
such as the rule and compass. In the ‟most
special” sense it includes every technical standard
of apprehension of a non-evident object; but in this
application ordinary standards are not regarded as
criteria but only logical standards and those which
the Dogmatists employ for the judging of truth.

We propose, therefore, in the first place to discuss the
logical criterion. But the logical criterion also may
be used in three senses —of the agent, or the
instrument, or the ‟according to what;” the agent,
for instance, may be a man, the instrument either
sense-perception or intelligence, and the ‟according
to what” the application of the impression ‟according
to” which the man proceeds to judge by means
of one of the aforesaid instruments.

It was appropriate, I consider, to make these 
prefatory observations so that we may realize what is
the exact subject of our discourse; and it remains
for us to proceed to our counter-statement aimed
against those who rashly assert that they have apprehended 
the criterion of truth, and we will begin with
the dispute which exists about this question.

Of those, then, who have treated of the criterion
some have declared that a criterion exists—the Stoics,
for example, and certain others—while by some its
existence is denied, as by the Corinthian Xeniades, 
amongst others, and by Xenophanes of Colophon,
who says—‟Over all things opinion bears sway;”
while we have adopted suspension of judgement as
to whether it does or does not exist.

This dispute, 
then, they will declare to be either capable or
incapable of decision; and if they shall say it is
incapable of decision they will be granting on the spot
the propriety of suspension of judgement, while if
they say it admits of decision, let them tell us whereby
it is to be decided, since we have no accepted criterion,
and do not even know, but are still inquiring, whether
any criterion exists.

Besides, in order to decide the
dispute which has arisen about the criterion, we must
possess an accepted criterion by which we shall be
able to judge the dispute; and in order to possess
an accepted criterion, the dispute about the criterion
must first be decided. And when the argument thus
reduces itself to a form of circular reasoning the
discovery of the criterion becomes impracticable, since
we do not allow them to adopt a criterion by assumption, 
while if they offer to judge the criterion by a
criterion we force them to a regress ad infinitum.
And furthermore, since demonstration requires a
demonstrated criterion, while the criterion requires
an approved demonstration, they are forced into
circular reasoning.

We suppose, then, that this is sufficient to expose
the rashness of the Dogmatists in respect of their
doctrine of the Criterion; but in order to enable us
to confute them in detail, it will not be out of place
to dwell at length upon this topic. We do not,
however, desire to oppose their opinions about the
criterion severally, one by one—for their controversy
is endless, and to do so would necessarily involve
us as well in a confused discussion,—but inasmuch as
the criterion in question is three-fold (the agent, the
instrument, and the ‟according to what”), we shall
discuss each of these in turn and establish the non-
apprehensibility of each, since in this way our exposition 
will be at once both methodical and complete.
Let us begin with the agent; for the perplexity
which attaches to this seems somehow to involve the
rest as well.

Now ‟Man” (if he is ‟the agent”) seems to me,
so far as regards the statements made by the
Dogmatists, to be not only non-apprehensible but also
inconceivable. At least we hear the Platonic Socrates 
expressly confessing that he does not know whether
he is a man or something else. And when they wish
to establish the concept of ‟Man” they disagree in
the first place, and in the second place they speak
unintelligibly.

Thus Democritus declares that ‟Man is that
which we all know.” Then, so far as his opinion goes,
we shall not know Man, since we also know a dog, and
consequently Dog too will be Man. And some men
we do not know, therefore they will not be men. Or
rather, if we are to judge by this concept, no one will
be a man; for since Democritus says that Man must
be known by all, and all men know no one man,
no one, according to him, will be a man.

And it is evident from the relevance of this criticism that we
are not now arguing sophistically. For this thinker
proceeds to say that ‟Only the atoms and the void
truly exist,” and these he says ‟form the substrate
not only of animals but of all compound substances,”
so that, so far as depends on these, we shall not form
a concept of the particular essence of ‟Man,” seeing
that they are common to all things. But besides
these there is no existing substrate; so that we shall
possess no means whereby we shall be able to 
distinguish Man from the other animals and form a
precise conception of him.

Again, Epicurus says that Man is ‟This sort
of a shape combined with vitality.” According
to him, then, since Man is shown by pointing out,
he that is not pointed out is not a man, and if anyone
points out a female, the male will not be Man, while
if he points out a male the female will not be Man.
And we shall also draw the same inferences from the
difference in the circumstances which we learn from
the Fourth Mode of Suspension.

Others used to assert that ‟Man is a rational 
mortal animal, receptive of intelligence and science.”
Now since it is shown by the First Mode of
Suspension that no animal is irrational but all
are receptive of intelligence and science, so far
as their statements go, we shall be unable to 
perceive what they mean.

And the attributes contained in this definition are used either in an ‟actual,” or
full, or in a potential sense; if in a full sense,
he that has not already acquired complete science
and is not rationally perfect and in the very act of
dying—for this is to be mortal in the full sense of
the word—is not a man. And if the sense is to be
potential, then he will not be a man who possesses
reason in perfection or who has acquired intelligence
and science; but this conclusion is even more absurd
than the former. 
 In this way, then, the concept of Man is shown to be
one which it is impossible to frame.

For when Plato 
declares that ‟Man is a featherless two-footed animal
with broad nails, receptive of political science,” not
even he himself claims to affirm this positively; for
if Man is one of the class of things which, as he puts
it, come into being but never possess absolute
being, and if it is impossible, in his view, to make a
positive declaration about things which never really
exist, then even Plato will not claim to be taken as
putting forward this definition positively, but rather
as making, in his usual way, a probable statement.

But even if we should grant, by way of concession, 
that Man can be conceived, yet he will be found
to be non-apprehensible. For he is compounded of
soul and body, and neither body nor soul perchance 
is apprehended; so that Man is not apprehended.

Now that body is not apprehended is easily shown 
thus: the attributes of an object are different from
the object whereof they are attributes. So when
colour or any similar quality is perceived by us, what
we perceive is probably the attributes of the body
but not the body itself. Certainly the body, they say,
exists in three dimensions; we ought therefore to
apprehend its length and breadth and depth in order
to apprehend the body. For if we perceived depth 
we should also discern silver pieces under their
coating of gold. Therefore we do not apprehend
the body either.

But, not to dwell on the controversy about the 
body, Man is also found to be non-apprehensible
owing to the fact that his soul is non-apprehensible.
That it is non-apprehensible is plain from this: of
those who have treated of the soul—so that we may
avoid dwelling on the long and endless controversy
—some have asserted, as did Dicaearchus the
Messenian, that the soul has no existence, others
that it has existence, and others have suspended
judgement.

If, then, the Dogmatists shall maintain 
that this dispute is incapable of decision, they will
be admitting thereby the non-apprehensibility of the
soul, while if they say it is capable of decision, let
them tell us by what means they will decide it. For
they cannot say ‟by sense-perception,” since the
soul is said by them to be an object of intelligence;
and if they shall say ‟by the intellect,” we will say
that inasmuch as the intellect is the least evident part
of the soul—as is shown by those who agree about the
real existence of the soul, though differing about the
intellect,

—if they propose to apprehend the soul and 
to decide the dispute about it by means of the
intellect, they will be proposing to decide and establish
the less questionable matter by the more questionable,
which is absurd. Thus, neither by the intellect will
the dispute about the soul be decided; therefore there
is no means to decide it. And this being so, it is
non-apprehensible; and, in consequence, Man too
will not be apprehended.

But even supposing we grant that Man is
apprehended, it would not, probably, be possible to show
that objects ought to be judged by him. For he who
asserts that objects ought to be judged by Man will
be asserting this either without proof or with proof. 
Not with proof; for the proof must be true and
tested, and therefore tested by some standard.
Since, then, we are unable to make an agreed statement
as to the standard by which the proof itself can
be tested (for we are still inquiring about the criterion
‟By whom”), we shall be unable to pronounce judgement 
on the proof, and therefore also to prove the
criterion, which is the subject of discussion.

And if it shall be asserted without proof that objects
ought to be judged by Man, the assertion will be
disbelieved, so that we shall be unable to affirm
positively that the criterion ‟By whom” (or Agent)
is Man. Moreover, who is to be the judge that the
criterion of the Agent is Man? For if they assert this
without a judgement (or criterion) they will surely not
be believed.

Yet if they say that a man is to be the
judge, that will be assuming the point at issue; 
while if they make another animal the judge, in what
way do they come to adopt that animal for the
purpose of judging whether Man is the criterion? If
they do so without a judgement, it will not be believed,
and if with a judgement, it in turn needs to be judged
by something. If, then, it is judged by itself, the
same absurdity remains (for the object of inquiry will
be judged by the object of inquiry); and if by Man,
circular reasoning is introduced; and if by some
judge other than these two, we shall once again in his
case demand the criterion ‟By whom,” and so on ad
infinitum. Consequently we shall not be in a position
to declare that objects ought to be judged by Man.

But let it be granted and established that objects
ought to be judged by Man. Then, since there exists
great difference amongst men, let the Dogmatists
first agree together that this is the particular man to
whom we must attend, and then, and only then, let
them bid us also to yield him our assent. But if they
are going to dispute about this ‟long as the waters
flow on and the tall trees cease not to burgeon” (to
quote the familiar saying), how can they urge us to
assent rashly to anyone?

For if they declare that
we must believe the Sage, we shall ask them ‟What
Sage?” Is it the Sage of Epicurus or of the Stoics,
the Cyrenaic Sage or the Cynic? For they will be
unable to return a unanimous answer.

And if anyone shall demand that we should desist 
from our inquiry about the Sage and simply believe
the man who is more sagacious than all others, then,
in the first place, they will dispute as to who is more
sagacious than the rest, and in the next place, even
if it be granted that it can be unanimously agreed
who the man is who is more sagacious than those of
the present and the past, even so this man will not
deserve credence.

For inasmuch as sagacity is liable 
to a great, indeed almost incalculable, advance or
decline in intensity, we assert that it is possible for
another man to arise who is more sagacious than this
man who, we say, is more sagacious than those of the
past and present. So, then, just as we are requested
to believe the man who is now said to be wiser than
those of the present and the past because of his
sagacity, so it is still more proper to believe his
successor in the future who will be more sagacious
than he. And when that successor has arisen, then
it is right to expect that yet another will arise more
sagacious than he, and so on ad infinitum.

Nor is it evident whether all these men will agree with one
another or contradict one another. And consequently,
even when one of them is acknowledged to be more
sagacious than those of the past and present, seeing
that we are unable to affirm positively that no man
will be more clever than he (this being non-evident),
we shall always have to wait for the judgement of the
more sagacious man of the future, and never give our
assent to this superior person.

And even should we grant, by way of concession, 
that no one either is, was, or will be more sagacious
than our hypothetical Sage, not even so is it proper
to believe him. For since it is the sagacious above
all who, in the construction of their doctrines, love
to champion unsound doctrines and to make them
appear sound and true, whenever this sharp-witted
person makes a statement we shall not know whether
he is stating the matter as it really is, or whether he
is defending as true what is really false and persuading
us to think of it as something true, on the ground that
he is more sagacious than all other men and therefore
incapable of being refuted by us. So not even to
this man will we assent, as one who judges matters
truly, since, though we suppose it possible that he
speaks the truth, we also suppose that owing to his
excessive cleverness he makes his statements with
the object of defending false propositions as true.
Consequently, in the judgement of propositions we
ought not to believe even the man who is thought to
be the most clever of all.

And if anyone shall say that we ought to attend to 
the consensus of the majority, we shall reply that this
is idle. For, in the first place, truth is a rare thing,
and on this account it is possible for one man to be
wiser than the majority. And, next, the opponents
of any criterion are more numerous than those who
agree about it; for those who admit any kind of
criterion different from that which seems to some to
be generally agreed upon oppose this latter, and they
are much more numerous than those who agree about
it.

And besides all this, those who agree are either 
in diverse dispositions or in one and the same. Now
they certainly are not in diverse dispositions so far as
regards the matter under discussion; else how could
they have made identical statements about it? And
if they are in one disposition, inasmuch as both the
one man who makes a different statement is in one
disposition and all these who agree together are also in
one, so far as regards the dispositions in which we find
ourselves, no difference is found even on the ground of
numbers. Consequently we ought not to pay heed
to the many more than to the one;

besides the further fact that—as we pointed out in ‟The Fourth
Mode of Scepticism” —the difference in judgements 
that is based on numbers is non-apprehensible,
since individual men are innumerable and we are
incapable of investigating and expounding the
judgements of all of them—what it is the majority of
all mankind affirm and what the minority. Thus,
on this showing also, the preference given to
men’s judgements on the ground of their numbers
is absurd.

But if we are not even to give heed to numbers,
we shall not find anyone by whom objects are to be
judged, in spite of our having granted so much by
way of concession. Therefore, on all these grounds,
the criterion ‟By whom” objects are to be judged
is found to be non-apprehensible.

And seeing that the other criteria are included in 
this one, since each of them is either a part or an
affection or an activity of Man, our next task might
perhaps have been to proceed in our discussion to one
of the subjects which follows next in order, supposing
that those criteria also have been sufficiently dealt
with in what we have now said; yet in order that we
may not seem to be shirking the specific counter-
statement proper to each case, we will exceed our
brief and deal with them also shortly. And we shall
discuss first the criterion ‟By means of which” (or
Instrument) as it is called.

Concerning this criterion the controversy which 
exists amongst the Dogmatists is fierce and, one may
say, unending. We, however,—with a view here also
to a systematic treatment,—maintain that inasmuch
as Man is, according to them, the criterion ‟By
whom” matters are judged, and Man (as they also
themselves agree) can have no other instrument
by means of which he will be able to judge except
sense and intellect, then if we shall show that he is
unable to judge by means of either sense alone or
intellect alone or both conjoined, we shall have given
a concise answer to all the individual opinions; for
they can all, as it seems, be referred to these three
rival theories. 
 Let us begin with the senses.

Since, then, some assert that the senses have
‟empty” impressions (none of the objects they seem
to apprehend having any real existence), and others 
say that all the objects by which they suppose them
to be moved are really existent, and others again 
say that some of the objects are real, some unreal,
we shall not know whom we should assent to. For
we shall not decide the controversy by sense-perception, 
since it is regarding this that we are making
our inquiry whether it is illusory or apprehends truly,
nor yet by anything else, seeing that there does not
even exist any other criterion ‟by means of which”
one ought to judge, according to the present
hypothesis.

So then the question whether the senses have
illusory affections or apprehend some real object will
be incapable of either decision or apprehension; and
there follows the corollary, that we must not attend
to sensation alone in our judgement of matters, since
regarding it we cannot so much as affirm that it
apprehends anything at all.

But let it be granted, by way of concession, that 
the senses are apprehensive; yet, even so they will
not be found any the less unreliable for judging the
external real objects. For certainly the senses are
affected in diverse ways by external objects—taste,
for instance, perceives the same honey now as bitter
and now as sweet; and vision pronounces the same
colour now blood-red and now white.

Nay, even smell is not consistent with itself; for certainly the
sufferer from headache declares myrrh to be unpleasant, 
while one who does not so suffer calls it
pleasant. And those who are possessed or in a frenzy
fancy they hear persons conversing with them whom we
do not hear. And the same water seems to those in a
fever to be unpleasant because of its excessive heat,
but to all others tepid.

Whether, then, one is to call 
all the appearances true, or some true and some false,
or all false, it is impossible to say since we possess
no agreed criterion whereby we shall judge the question 
we are proposing to decide, nor are we even
provided with a proof that is true and approved,
because we are still in search of the criterion of truth
‟By means of which” the true proof itself ought to
be tested.

For these reasons he also who asks us to 
believe those who are in a natural state, but not
those whose disposition is non-natural, will be acting
absurdly; for he will not gain credence if he says
this without proof, and, for the reasons given above,
he will not possess a true and approved proof.

And even were one to concede that the sense- 
impressions of those in a natural state are reliable,
and those of men in a non-natural condition unreliable, 
even so the judgement of external real objects
by means of the senses alone will be found to be
impossible. For certainly the sense of sight, even
when it is in a natural state, pronounces the same
tower to be at one time round, at another square;
and the sense of taste declares the same food to be
unpleasant in the case of those full-fed, but pleasant
in the case of those who are hungry;

and the sense of hearing likewise perceives the same sound as loud
by night but as faint by day; and the sense of smell 
regards the same objects as malodorous in the case
of most people, but not so in the case of tanners;
and the same sense of touch feels warmth in the outer
hall, when we enter the bath-rooms, but cold when we
leave them. Therefore, since even when in a natural
state the senses contradict themselves, and their dispute 
is incapable of decision, seeing that we possess
no accepted criterion by means of which it can be
judged, the same perplexities must necessarily follow.
Moreover, for the establishment of this conclusion we
may derive still further arguments from our previous
discussion of the Modes of Suspension. Hence it
would probably be untrue to say that sense-perception 
alone is able to judge real external objects.

Let us, then, proceed in our exposition to the
intellect. Now those who claim that we should attend
to the intellect only in our judgement of things will,
in the first place, be unable to show that the existence
of intellect is apprehensible. For when Gorgias, in
denying that anything exists, denies also the existence 
of intellect, while some declare that it has real
existence, how will they decide this contradiction?
Not by the intellect, for so they will be assuming the
matter in question; nor yet by anything else, since,
as they assert, according to our present assumption
there exists nothing else by means of which objects
are judged. So then the problem as to whether
intellect does or does not exist will not admit of
decision or apprehension; and from this it follows,
as a corollary, that in the judgement of objects we
ought not to attend to the intellect alone, which has
not as yet been apprehended.

But let it be granted that the intellect has been 
apprehended, and let us agree, by way of assumption,
that it really exists; I still affirm that it cannot judge
objects. For if it does not even discern itself accurately 
but contradicts itself about its own existence
and the mode of its origin and the position in which
it is placed, how can it be able to apprehend
anything else accurately?

And even if it be granted 
that the intellect is capable of judging objects, we
shall not discover how to judge according to it. For
since there exists great divergence in respect of the
intellect—for the intellect of Gorgias, according to
which he states that nothing exists, is one kind, and
another kind is that of Heracleitus, according to which
he declares that all things exist, and another that of
those who say that some things do and others do not
exist—we shall have no means of deciding between
these divergent intellects, nor shall we be able to
assert that it is right to take this man’s intellect as
our guide but not that man’s.

For if we venture 
to judge by any one intellect, by thus agreeing to
assent to one side in the dispute we shall be assuming
the matter in question; while if we judge by anything 
else, we shall be falsifying the assertion that
one ought to judge objects by the intellect alone.

Further, we shall be able to show, from the statements 
made concerning the criterion ‟By whom”
(as it is called), that we are unable to discover the
intellect that is cleverer than all others; and also
that if we should discover the intellect that is cleverer
than past and present intellects

we ought not to attend to it, since it is not evident whether yet
another intellect may not arise which is cleverer than
it; and further, that even if we assume an intellect
which none could possibly surpass, we shall not
assent to the man who judges by means of it, dreading 
lest he may put forward some false statement
and succeed in persuading us of its truth because
he possesses the keenest intellect. Neither, then, by
the intellect alone ought we to judge objects.

The only remaining alternative is judgement by 
means of both senses and intellect. But this again is
impossible; for not only do the senses not guide the
intellect to apprehension, but they even oppose it. For
it is certain, at any rate, that from the fact that honey
appears bitter to some and sweet to others, Democritus 
declared that it is neither sweet nor bitter,
while Heracleitus said that it is both. And the same
account may be given of all the other senses and
sensibles. Thus, when it starts out from the senses,
the intellect is compelled to make diverse and 
conflicting statements; and this is alien to a criterion of
apprehension.

Then there is this also to be said: they will judge 
objects either by all the senses and by all men’s
intellects or by some. But if a man shall say ‟by all,”
he will be claiming what is impossible in view of the
immense discrepancy which obviously exists amongst
the senses and the intellects; and moreover, by
reason of the assertion of Gorgias’s intellect that ‟we
must not give heed either to sense or to intellect,”
the man’s statement will be demolished. And if they
shall say ‟by some,” how will they decide that we
ought to give heed to these senses and this intellect
and not to those, seeing that they possess no accepted
criterion by which to judge the differing senses and
intellects?

And if they shall say that we will judge 
the senses and the intellects by the intellect and the
senses, they are assuming the matter in question;
for what we are questioning is the possibility of
judging by means of these.

Another point we must make is this: either one 
will judge both the senses and the intellects by the
senses, or both the senses and the intellects by the
intellects, or the senses by the senses and the intellect
by the intellects, or the intellects by the senses and
the senses by the intellect. If then they shall propose
to judge both objects by the senses or by the intellect,
they will no longer be judging by sense and intellect
but by one of these two, whichever one they may
choose, and thus they will be entangled in the 
perplexities previously mentioned.

And if they shall judge the senses by the senses and the intellects by
the intellect, then, since both senses conflict with
senses and intellects with intellects, whichever of the
conflicting senses they shall adopt for judging the
rest of the senses, they will be assuming the matter
in question; for they will be adopting one section of
the series in dispute, as being already reliable, to
decide about the others which, equally with it, are in
question.

And the same argument applies to the 
intellects. And if they shall judge the intellects
by the senses, and the senses by the intellect, this
involves circular reasoning inasmuch as it is required
that the intellects should be judged first in order that
the senses may be judged, and the senses be first
scrutinized in order that the intellects may be tested.

Since, therefore, criteria of the one species cannot be 
judged by those of a like species, nor those of both
the species by those of one species, nor conversely
by those of an unlike species, we shall not be able to
prefer intellect to intellect or sense to sense. And
because of this we shall have nothing by which to
judge; for if we shall be unable to judge by all the
senses and intellects, and shall not know either by
which of them we ought and by which we ought not
to judge, then we shall possess no means by which to
judge objects. 

 Consequently, for these reasons also the criterion
‟By means of which” will have no real existence.

Let us consider next the Criterion ‟According to 
which,” as they say, objects are judged. In the first
place, then, we may say this of it, that ‟presentation”
is inconceivable. They declare that ‟presentation”
is an impression on ‟the regent part.” Since, then,
the soul, and the regent part, is breath or something
more subtile than breath, as they affirm, no one will
be able to conceive of an impression upon it either
by way of depression and eminence, as we see in
the case of seals, or by way of the magical ‟alteration”
they talk about; for the soul will not be able
to conserve the remembrance of all the concepts
that compose an art, since the pre-existing concepts
are obliterated by the subsequent ‟alterations.”

Yet even if ‟presentation” could be conceived, it would
still be non-apprehensible; for since it is an affection
of the regent part, and the regent part, as we have
shown, is not apprehended, neither shall we
apprehend its affection.

Further, even were we to grant that the ‟presentation”
is apprehended, objects cannot be judged
according to it; for the intellect, as they assert, does
not make contact with external objects and receive
presentations by means of itself but by means of
the senses, and the senses do not apprehend external
real objects but only, if at all, their own affections. 
So then the presentation will be that of the affection
of the sense, which is different from the external
reality; for honey is not the same as my feeling of
sweetness nor gall the same as my feeling of bitterness, 
but a different thing.

And if this affection differs
from the external real object, the presentation will
not be that of the external reality but of something
else which is different therefrom. If, therefore, the
intellect judges according to this, it judges badly and
not according to reality. Consequently, it is absurd
to say that external objects are judged according to
the presentation.

Nor, again, is it possible to assert that the soul
apprehends external realities by means of the affections
of sense owing to the similarity of the affections
of the senses to the external real objects. For how
is the intellect to know whether the affections of the
senses are similar to the objects of sense when it has
not itself encountered the external objects, and the
senses do not inform it about their real nature but
only about their own affections, as I have argued
from the Modes of Suspension?

For just as the man who does not know Socrates but has seen a picture of
him does not know whether the picture is like Socrates,
so also the intellect when it gazes on the affections of
the senses but does not behold the external objects
will not so much as know whether the affections of
the senses are similar to the external realities. So
that not even on the ground of resemblance will he
be able to judge these objects according to the
presentation.

But let us grant by way of concession that in 
addition to being conceived and apprehended the
presentation is also such that it admits of objects
being judged according to it, although the argument
points to an entirely opposite conclusion. In this
case we shall either believe every presentation, or
impression, and judge according thereto, or some one
impression. But if we are to believe every impression,
clearly we shall believe also that of Xeniades according
to which he asserted that all impressions are un
untrustworthy, and our statement will be reversed and
made to say that all impressions are not of such a sort
that objects can be judged according to them.

And if we are to believe some, how shall we decide that
it is proper to believe these and disbelieve those?
For if they say we are to do so without presentation,
they will be granting that presentation is superfluous
for judging, inasmuch as they will be stating that
objects can be judged without it; while if they say
‟by the aid of presentation,” how will they select
the presentation which they are adopting for the
purpose of judging all the other presentations?

Once again they will need a second presentation to judge
the first, and a third to judge the second, and so on
ad infinitum. But it is impossible to judge an infinite
series; and therefore it is impossible to discover what
sort of presentations we ought to employ as criteria,
and what we ought not. Seeing, then, that, even
should we grant that one ought to judge objects
according to presentations, whether we adopt the
alternative of trusting all as criteria or that of trusting
some and distrusting others, in either case the argument 
is overthrown, and we are forced to conclude
that we ought not to adopt presentations as criteria
for the judging of objects.

This is enough to say now, in our outline sketch,
with reference to the criterion ‟According to which,”
as it was said, objects are judged. But one should
notice that we do not propose to assert that the
criterion of truth is unreal (for that would be dogmatism); 
but since the Dogmatists appear to have
established plausibly that there really is a criterion of
truth, we have set up counter-arguments which appear
to be plausible; and though we do not positively
affirm either that they are true or that they are more
plausible than their opposites, yet because of the
apparently equal plausibility of these arguments and
of those propounded by the Dogmatists we deduce
suspension of judgement.

Even were we to grant, by way of hypothesis, that 
a criterion of truth exists, it is found to be useless and
vain if we recall that, so far as the statements of the
Dogmatists go, truth is unreal and the true non-
substantial.

The passage we recall is this: ‟The
true is said to differ from truth in three ways—in
essence, composition, potency. In essence, since the
true is incorporeal (for it is judgement and ‟expression” ),
while truth is a body (for it is knowledge
declaratory of all true things, and knowledge is a
particular state of the regent part, just as the fist is a
particular state of the hand, and the regent part is a
body; for according to them it is breath).

In composition, because the true is a simple thing, as for
example ‘I converse,’ whereas truth is a compound
of many true cognitions.

In potency, since truth depends on knowledge but the 
true does not altogether so depend. Consequently, 
as they say, truth exists only in the good man, but 
the true in the bad man as well; for it is possible 
for the bad man to utter something true.” 
 Such are the statements of the Dogmatists.

But awe,—having regard here again to the plan of our
treatise,—shall confine our present discussion to the
true, since its refutation entails that of truth as well,
it being defined as the ‟system of the knowledge of
things true.” Again, since some of our arguments,
whereby we dispute the very existence of the true,
are more general, others of a specific kind, whereby
we prove that the true does not exist in utterance or
in expression or in the movement of the intellect, we
deem it sufficient for the present to set forth only
those of the more general kind. For just as, when
the foundation of a wall collapses, all the super-
structure collapses along with it, so also, when, the
substantial existence of the true is refuted, all the
particular inventions of the logic of the Dogmatists
are included in the refutation.

Seeing, then, that there is a controversy amongst 
the Dogmatists regarding ‟the true,” since some
assert that something true exists, others that nothing
true exists, it is impossible to decide the controversy,
because the man who says that something true exists
will not be believed without proof, on account of the
controversy; and if he wishes to offer proof, he will
be disbelieved if he acknowledges that his proof is
false, whereas if he declares that his proof is true he
becomes involved in circular reasoning and will be
required to show proof of the real truth of his proof,
and another proof of that proof, and so on ad infinitum.
But it is impossible to prove an infinite series; and so
it is impossible also to get to know that something
true exists.

Moreover, the ‟something,” which is, they declare, 
the highest genus of all, is either true or false
or neither false nor true or both false and true.
If, then, they shall assert that it is false they will
be confessing that all things are false. For just as it
follows because ‟animal” is animate that all particular 
animals also are animate, so too if the highest
genus of all (‟something”) is false all the particulars
also will be false and nothing true. And this involves
also the conclusion that nothing is false; for the very
statements ‟all things are false,” and ‟something
false exists,” being themselves included in the ‟all,”
will be false.

And if the ‟something” is true, all
things will be true; and from this again it follows
that nothing is true, since this statement itself (I
mean that ‟nothing is true”) being ‟something” is
true. And if the ‟something” is both false and 
true, each of its particulars will be both false and true.
From which we conclude that nothing is really true;
for that which has its real nature such that it is true
will certainly not be false. And if the ‟something”
is neither false nor true, it is acknowledged that all
the particulars also, being declared to be neither
false nor true, will not be true. So for these reasons
it will be non-evident to us whether the true exists.

Furthermore, the true things are either apparent 
only, or non-evident only, or in part non-evident and
in part apparent; but none of these alternatives is
true, as we shall show; therefore nothing is true. If,
however, the true things are apparent only, they will
assert either that all or that some of the apparent are
true. And if they say ‟all,” the argument is 
overthrown; for it is apparent to some that nothing is
true. If, again, they say ‟some,” no one can assert
without testing that these phenomena are true, those
false, while if he employs a test or criterion he will
say either that this criterion is apparent or that it is
non-evident. But it is certainly not non-evident;
for it is now being assumed that the apparent objects
only are true.

And if it is apparent, since the matter 
in question is what apparent things are true and what
false, that apparent thing which is adopted for the
purpose of judging the apparent objects will itself in
turn require an apparent criterion, and this again
another, and so on ad infinitum. But it is impossible
to judge an infinite series; and hence it is impossible
to apprehend whether the true things are apparent
only.

Similarly also he who declares that the non-evident 
only are true will not imply that they are all true (for
he will not say that it is true that the stars are even
in number and that they are also odd); while if
some are true, whereby shall we decide that these
non-evident things are true and those false? Certainly
not by an apparent criterion; and if by a non-evident
one, then since our problem is which of the non-
evident things are true and which false, this non-
evident criterion will itself also need another to judge
it, and this again a third, and so on ad infinitum.
Neither, then, are the true things non-evident only.

The remaining alternative is to say that of the true 
some are apparent, some non-evident; but this too
is absurd. For either all the apparent and all the
non-evident are true, or some of the apparent and
some of the non-evident. If, then, we say ‟all,” the
argument will again be overthrown, since the truth is
granted of the statement ‟nothing is true,” and the
truth will be asserted of both the statements ‟the
stars are even in number” and ‟they are odd.”

But if some of the apparent are true and some of the 
non-evident, how shall we judge that of the apparent
these are true but those false? For if we do so
by means of an apparent thing, the argument is
thrown back ad infinitum; and if by means of a thing
non-evident, then, since the non-evidents also require
to be judged, by what means is this non-evident thing
to be judged? If by an apparent thing, we fall into
circular reasoning; and if by a thing non-evident,
into the regress ad infinitum.

And about the non-evident we must make a similar statement; for he
who attempts to judge them by something non-
evident is thrown back ad infinitum, while he who
judges by a thing apparent or with the constant
assistance of a thing apparent falls back ad infinitum,
or, if he passes over to the apparent, is guilty of
circular reasoning. It is false, therefore, to say that
of the true some are apparent, some non-evident.

If, then, neither the apparent nor the non-evident 
alone are true, nor yet some apparent and some non-
evident things, nothing is true. But if nothing is
true, and the criterion seems to require the true for
the purpose of judging, the criterion is useless and
vain, even if we grant, by way of concession, that it
possesses some substantial reality. And if we have
to suspend judgement as to whether anything true
exists, it follows that those who declare that ‟dialectic
is the science of things true and false and neither” 
speak rashly.

And since the criterion of truth has appeared to be 
unattainable, it is no longer possible to make positive
assertions either about those things which (if we may
depend on the statements of the Dogmatists) seem
to be evident or about those which are non-evident;
for since the Dogmatists suppose they apprehend
the latter from the things evident, if we are forced
to suspend judgement about the evident, how shall
we dare to make pronouncements about the non-
evident?

Yet, by way of super-addition, we shall 
also raise separate objections against the non-evident
class of objects. And since they seem to be apprehended
and confirmed by means of sign and proof,
we shall show briefly that it is proper to suspend
judgement also about sign and proof. We will
begin with sign; for indeed proof seems to be a
kind of sign.

Of objects, then, some, according to the Dogmatists, 
are pre-evident, some non-evident; and of the
non-evident, some are altogether non-evident, some
occasionally non-evident, some naturally non-evident.
Pre-evident are, as they assert, those which come to
our knowledge of themselves, as for example the
fact that it is day-time; altogether non-evident are
those which are not of a nature to fall within our
apprehension, as that the stars are even in number;
occasionally non-evident are those which,

though patent in their nature, are occasionally rendered non-
evident to us owing to certain external circumstances, 
as the city of Athens is now to me; naturally non-
evident are those which are not of such a nature as
to fall within our clear perception, like the intelligible
pores; for these never appear of themselves but may
be thought to be apprehended, if at all, owing to
other things, such as perspirations or something of
the sort.

Now the pre-evident objects, they say, do 
not require a sign, for they are apprehended of themselves. 
And neither do the altogether non-evident,
since of course they are not even apprehended at all.
But such objects as are occasionally or naturally
non-evident are apprehended by means of signs—
not of course by the same signs, but by ‟suggestive” 
signs in the case of the occasionally non-evident
and by ‟indicative” signs in the case of the
naturally non-evident.

Of the signs, then, according to them, some are
suggestive, some indicative. They term a sign
‟suggestive” when, being mentally associated with
the thing signified, it by its clearness at the time
of its perception, though the thing signified remains
non-evident, suggests to us the thing associated with
it, which is not clearly perceived at the moment—
as for instance in the case of smoke and fire.

An ‟indicative” sign, they say, is that which is not
clearly associated with the thing signified, but signifies
that whereof it is a sign by its own particular nature
and constitution, just as, for instance, the bodily
motions are signs of the soul. Hence, too, they define
this sign as follows: ‟An indicative sign is an antecedent 
judgement, in a sound hypothetical syllogism, 
which serves to reveal the consequent.”

Seeing, then, that there are, as we have said, two different
kinds of sign, we do not argue against every sign
but only against the indicative kind as it seems to
be invented by the Dogmatists. For the suggestive
sign is relied on by living experience, since when a
man sees smoke fire is signified, and when he beholds
a scar he says that there has been a wound. Hence,
not only do we not fight against living experience,
but we even lend it our support by assenting undogmatically 
to what it relies on, while opposing the
private inventions of the Dogmatists.

These prefatory remarks it was, perhaps, fitting to
make for the sake of elucidating the object of our
inquiry. It remains for us to proceed to our refutation, 
not in any anxiety to show that the indicative
sign is wholly unreal, but reminding ourselves of the
apparent equivalence of the arguments adduced for
its reality and for its unreality.

Now the sign, judging by the statements of the
Dogmatists about it, is inconceivable. Thus, for
instance, the Stoics, who seem to have defined it
exactly, in attempting to establish the conception of
the sign, state that ‟A sign is an antecedent judgement 
in a valid hypothetical syllogism, which serves
to reveal the consequent;” and ‟judgement” they
define as ‟A self-complete expression which is of
itself declaratory;” and ‟valid hypothetical syllogism”
as one ‟which does not begin with truth 
and end with a false consequent.”

For either the syllogism begins with the true and ends with the true
(e.g. ‟If there is day, there is light”), or it begins with
what is false and ends in falsehood (like ‟If the earth
flies, the earth is winged”), or it begins with truth and
ends in falsehood (like ‟If the earth exists, the earth
flies”), or it begins with falsehood and ends in truth
(like ‟If the earth flies, the earth exists”). And
they say that of these only that which begins with
truth and ends in falsehood is invalid, and the rest
valid.

‟Antecedent,” they say, is ‟the precedent
clause in a hypothetical syllogism which begins in
truth and ends in truth.” And it ‟serves to reveal the
consequent,” since in the syllogism ‟If this woman
has milk, she has conceived,” the clause ‟If this
woman has milk” seems to be evidential of the clause
‟she has conceived.”

Such is the Stoic doctrine. But we assert, firstly,
that it is non-evident whether any ‟expression”
exists. For since some of the Dogmatists, the
Epicureans, declare that expression does not exist,
others, the Stoics, that it does exist, when the Stoics
assert its existence they are employing either mere
assertion or demonstration as well. If assertion, then
the Epicureans will confute them with the assertion
which states that no expression exists. But if they
shall adduce demonstration, then since demonstration 
is composed of expressed judgements, and
because it is composed of expressions will be unable
to be adduced to confirm the existence of expression
(for how will he who refuses to allow the existence of
expression grant the reality of a system compounded
of expressions?),

—it follows that the man who 
attempts to establish the existence of expression
from the reality of the system of expressions is proposing 
to confirm the problematic by the problematic.
If, then, it is impossible to establish either simply or
by means of demonstration that any expression exists,
it is non-evident that any expression exists. 
 So, too, with the question whether judgement
exists; for the judgement is a form of expression.

And very possibly, even should it be granted by 
way of assumption that expression exists, judgement
will be found to be non-existent, it being compounded
of expressions not mutually co-existent. Thus, for
example, in the case of ‟If day exists, light exists,”
when I say ‟day exists” the clause ‟light exists” is
not yet in existence, and when I say ‟light exists”
the clause ‟day exists” is no longer in existence.
If then it is impossible for things compounded of
certain parts to be really existent if those parts do
not mutually co-exist, and if the parts whereof the
judgement is composed do not mutually co-exist,
then the judgement will have no real existence.

But passing over this objection, it will be found that
the valid hypothetical syllogism is non-apprehensible.
For Philo says that a valid hypothetical syllogism is
‟that which does not begin with a truth and end
with a falsehood,” as for instance the syllogism ‟If
it is day, I converse,” when in fact it is day and I am
conversing; but Diodorus defines it as ‟that which
neither was nor is capable of beginning with a truth
and ending with a falsehood;” so that according to
him the syllogism now mentioned seems to be false,
since if it is in fact day but I have remained silent
it will begin with a truth but end with a falsehood,
whereas the syllogism

‟If atomic elements of things
do not exist, atomic elements exist,” seems true,
since it begins with the false clause ‟atomic elements
do not exist” and will end, according to him, with
the true clause ‟atomic elements exist.” And
those who introduce ‟connexion,” or ‟coherence,” 
assert that it is a valid hypothetical syllogism whenever 
the opposite of its consequent contradicts its
antecedent clause; so that, according to them, the
above-mentioned syllogisms are invalid, whereas the
syllogism ‟If day exists, day exists” is true.

And those who judge by ‟implication” declare
that a hypothetical syllogism is true when its consequent 
is potentially included in its antecedent;
and according to them the syllogism ‟If day exists,
day exists,” and every such duplicated syllogism,
will probably be false; for it is not feasible that any
object should itself be included in itself.

Probably, then, it will not seem feasible to get this
controversy resolved. For whether we prefer any one
of the above-mentioned rival views without proof or
by the aid of proof, in neither case shall we gain
credence. For proof itself is held to be valid whenever
its conclusion follows the combination of its
premisses as the consequent follows the antecedent;
thus, for example—‟If it is day it is light; but in
fact it is day; therefore it is light:” ‟If it is day it
is light,” ‟it is day and also it is light.”

But when we inquire how we are to judge the logical sequence
of the consequent in its relation to the antecedent,
we are met with the argument in a circle. For in
order to prove the judgement upon the hypothetical
syllogism, the conclusion of the proof must follow
logically from its premisses, as we said above; and,
in turn, in order to establish this, the hypothetical
syllogism and its logical sequence must be tested;
and this is absurd.

So then the valid hypothetical syllogism is non-apprehensible. 
 But the ‟antecedent” also is unintelligible. For
the antecedent, as they assert, is ‟the leading clause
in a hypothetical syllogism of the kind which begins
with a truth and ends in a truth.”

But if the sign serves to reveal the consequent, the consequent is
either pre-evident or non-evident. If, then, it is
pre-evident, it will not so much as need the thing
which is to reveal it but will be apprehended along
with it and will not be the object signified thereby,
and hence also the thing mentioned will not be a
‟sion” of the object. But if the consequent is non-
evident, seeing that there exists an unsettled controversy 
about things non-evident, as to which of them
are true, which false, and in general whether any of
them is true, it will be non-evident whether the
hypothetical syllogism ends in a true consequent.
And this involves the further fact that it is non-
evident whether the leading clause in the syllogism
is the logical antecedent.

But to pass over this
objection also, the sign cannot serve to reveal the
consequent, if the thing signified is relative to the
sign and is, therefore, apprehended along with it. For
relatives are apprehended along with each other;
and just as ‟right” cannot be apprehended as ‟right
of left” before ‟left,” nor vice versa—and the same
holds good of all other relative terms,—so neither will
it be possible for the sign, as ‟sign of signified,” to be
apprehended before the thing signified.

And if the sign is not apprehended before the thing signified,
neither can it really serve to reveal the actual thing
which is apprehended along with itself and not after
itself. 
 Thus also, so far as we may judge by the usual
statements of the dissenting philosophers (the
Stoics), the sign is inconceivable. For they assert
that it is both relative and serving to reveal the
thing signified, in relation to which they say it was.

Accordingly, if it is relative and in relation to the
thing signified it certainly ought to be apprehended
along with the thing signified, as is ‟left” with
‟right,” ‟up” with ‟down,” and the rest of the
relative terms. Whereas, if it serves to reveal the
thing signified, it certainly ought to be apprehended
before it, in order that by being foreknown it may
lead us to a conception of the object which comes to
be known by means of it.

But it is impossible to form a conception of an object which cannot be known
before the thing before which it must necessarily be
apprehended; and so it is impossible to conceive of
an object which is both relative and also really serves
to reveal the thing in relation to which it is thought.
But the sign is, as they affirm, both relative and
serving to reveal the thing signified; wherefore it is
impossible to conceive of the sign.

Furthermore, there is this also to be said. Amongst
our predecessors there existed a controversy, some
declaring that an indicative sign exists, others 
maintaining that no indicative sign exists. He, then,
who asserts the existence of an indicative sign will
assert it either simply and without proof, making a
bald assertion, or by the aid of proof. But if he shall
employ mere assertion he will not gain credence;
while if he shall propose to prove it he will be assuming 
the matter in question.

For since proof is stated
to come under the genus sign, seeing that it is 
disputed whether or not a sign exists, there will also be a
dispute as to whether proof does or does not at all
exist—just as, when we make, let us suppose, the
inquiry ‟Does animal exist?” we are inquiring also
‟Does man exist?” But it is absurd to try to prove
the matter in question either by means of what is
equally in question or by means of itself. So that
neither will one be able by means of proof to affirm
positively that sign exists.

And if it is not possible
either simply or with the aid of proof to make a
positive declaration about the sign, it is impossible
to make an apprehensive affirmation concerning it;
and if the sign is not apprehended with exactness,
neither will it be said to be significant of anything,
inasmuch as there is no agreement even about
itself; and because of this it will not even be a sign.
Hence, according to this line of reasoning also, the
sign will be unreal and inconceivable.

But there is this further to be said. Either the signs
are apparent only or non-evident only, or some are
apparent and some non-evident. But none of these
alternatives is valid; therefore sign does not exist. 
 Now that all the signs are not non-evident is shown
by the following argument. The non-evident does
not become apparent of itself, as the Dogmatists
assert, but is perceived by means of something else.
The sign, therefore, if it were non-evident, would
require another non-evident sign—since, according
to the hypothesis assumed, there is no apparent sign
—and this again a third, and so on ad infinitum.
But it is impossible to grasp an infinite series of
signs; and so it is impossible for the sign to be
apprehended when it is non-evident. And for this
reason it will also be unreal, as it is unable to signify
anything and to be a sign owing to its not being
apprehended.

And if all the signs are apparent, then, because
the sign is a relative thing and in relation to the
thing signified, and relatives are apprehended conjointly, 
the things said to be signified, being apprehended 
along with what is apparent, will be apparent.
For just as when the right and left are perceived
together, the right is not said to appear more than
the left nor the left than the right, so when the sign
and the thing signified are apprehended together the
sign should not be said to appear any more than the
thing signified.

And if the thing signified is apparent,
it will not even be signified, as it requires nothing to
signify and reveal it. Hence, just as when ‟right”
is abolished there exists no ‟left,” so when the thing
signified is abolished there can exist no sign, so that
the sign is found to be unreal, if one should declare
that the signs are apparent only.

It remains to declare that of the signs some are
apparent, others non-evident; but even so the 
difficulties remain. For the things said to be signified
by the apparent signs will, as we said before, be
apparent and require nothing to signify them, and
will not even be things signified at all, so that neither
will the signs be signs, as not signifying anything.

And as to the non-evident signs which need things 
to reveal them, if we say that they are signified by
things non-evident, the argument will be involved in
a regress ad infinitum, rendering them non-apprehensible 
and therefore unreal, as we said before; 
whereas, if they are to be signified by things apparent,
they will be apparent, because apprehended along
with their apparent signs, and therefore also unreal.
For it is impossible for any object really to exist
which is by nature both non-evident and apparent;
but the signs which we are discussing though assumed
to be non-evident have been found to be apparent
owing to the reversal of the argument.

If, therefore, the signs are neither all apparent nor
all non-evident, nor yet some of the signs apparent
and some non-evident, and besides these there is no
other alternative, as they themselves affirm, then the
so-called signs will be unreal.

So then these few arguments out of many will be 
enough for the present to suggest to us the 
non-existence of an indicative sign. Next, we shall set
forth those which go to suggest the existence of a
sign, in order that we may exhibit the equipollence
of the counter-balancing arguments. 
 Either, then, the phrases used in criticism of the
sign signify something or they signify nothing. But
if they are non-significant how could they affect the
reality of the sign? While if they signify something,
there exists a sign.

Further, the arguments against
the sign are either probative or non-probative; but
if they are non-probative they do not prove the non-
existence of a sign; while if they are probative,
since proof, as serving to reveal the conclusion, belongs
to the genus sign, sign will exist. Whence this argument 
also is propounded: ‟If sign exists, sign exists;
and if sign exists not, sign exists; for the non-
existence of sign is shown by proof, which is a form
of sign. But sign either exists or exists not; 
therefore sign exists.”

And this argument is counter-
balanced by the following argument: ‟If any sign
does not exist, sign does not exist; and if sign is
that which the Dogmatists declare sign to be, sign
does not exist (for the sign under discussion, accord-
ing to the conception of it and as stated to be both
relative and serving to reveal the thing signified, is
found to be unreal, as we have shown).

But sign either exists or exists not; therefore sign does not
exist.” 
 Regarding also the phrases used in support of the
sign, let the Dogmatists themselves say in reply to our
argument whether they signify something or signify
nothing. For if they signify nothing, the existence
of sign is not confirmed; whereas if they signify
something, the thing signified will follow them; and
it was ‟the existence of a sign.” And from this
follows, as we have shown, the non-existence of
sign, because of the reversal of the argument. 
 In short, then, since such plausible arguments are
adduced both for the existence and for the non-
existence of sign, we must declare that sign is ‟no
more” existent than non-existent.

Now it is plain from this that neither is proof a
matter upon which there is agreement; for if we
suspend judgement about the sign, and proof also is
a sign, we must necessarily suspend judgement about
proof likewise. And in fact we shall find that the
arguments propounded concerning the sign can be
adapted to apply to proof as well, since it seems to
be both relative and serving to reveal the conclusion,
and from these properties followed nearly all the
results we mentioned in the case of the sign.

If,however, one ought to devote a separate discussion
to proof, I shall proceed to treat of it concisely after
endeavouring first to explain shortly the definition
they give of proof. 
 Proof is, as they assert, ‟an argument which, by
means of agreed premisses, reveals by way of deduction
a non-evident inference.” What their statement
means will be made clearer by what follows. ‟An
argument is a system composed of premisses and an
inference.

The premisses of it are (it is said) the
judgements adopted by consent for the establishment
of the inference, and the inference is the judgement
established by the premisses.” For example, in the
argument ‟If it is day, it is light; but it is in truth
day; therefore it is light,” the clause ‟therefore it
is light” is a conclusion, and the rest are premisses.

And of arguments some are conclusive, some inconclusive—
conclusive when the hypothetical syllogism 
which begins with the combination made by the
premisses of the argument and ends with its
inference is valid; thus, for example, the argument
just stated is conclusive since the combination of its
premisses—‟it is day” and ‟if it is day, it is light”
—is followed by ‟it is light” in the syllogism ‟it is
day, and if it is day it is light; therefore it is light.”
But arguments that are not like this are inconclusive.

And of the conclusive arguments some are true,
some not true—true when not only the syllogism
formed by the combination of the premisses and the
inference is valid, as we said above, but the conclusion 
also and the combination of the premisses,
which is the antecedent in the syllogism, is really
true. And a combination is true when it has all its
parts true, as in the case of ‟It is day, and if it is
day, it is light;” but those of a different kind are
not true.

For an argument such as this—‟If it is
night, it is dark; but in fact it is night; therefore
it is dark”—is indeed conclusive, since the syllogism
‟it is night, and if it is night it is dark, therefore
it is dark” is a valid one, but, when it is day-time, it
is not true. For the antecedent combination—‟it is
night, and if it is night it is dark”—is false since it
contains the falsehood ‟it is night;” for the 
combination which contains a falsehood is false. Hence
they also say that a true argument is that which
deduces a true conclusion from true premisses.

Of true arguments, again, some are ‟probative,”
some ‟non-probative;” and the probative are those
which deduce something non-evident by means of
pre-evident premisses, the non-probative those not of
this sort. For example, an argument such as this—
‟If it is day it is light; but in fact it is day; therefore 
it is light” is not probative; for its conclusion,
that ‟it is light,” is pre-evident. But an argument
like this—‟If sweat pours through the surface, there
are insensible pores; but in fact sweat does pour
through the surface; therefore there are insensible
pores”—is a probative one, as its conclusion (‟there
are therefore insensible pores”) is non-evident.

And of arguments which deduce something non-
evident, some conduct us through the premisses to
the conclusion by way of progression only, others
both by way of progression and by way of discovery
as well. By progression, for instance, are those
which seem to depend on belief and memory, such
as the argument ‟If a god has said to you that
this man will be rich, this man will be rich; but this
god (assume that I point to Zeus) has said to you that
this man will be rich; therefore he will be rich;”
for we assent to the conclusion not so much on account
of the logical force of the premisses as because of our
belief in the statement of the god.

But some arguments conduct us to the conclusion by way of discovery
as well as of progression, like the following:
‟If sweat pours through the surface, there are
insensible pores; but the first is true, therefore also
the second;” for the pouring of the sweat makes
discovery of the fact of the existence of pores,
because of the prior assumption that moisture cannot
pass through a solid body.

So, then, proof ought to be an argument which
is deductive and true and has a non-evident
conclusion which is discovered by the potency of the
premisses; and because of this, proof is defined as
‟an argument which by means of agreed premisses
discovers by way of deduction a non-evident
inference.” It is in these terms, then, that they are
in the habit of explaining the conception of proof.

That proof has no real existence may be inferred
from their own statements, by refuting each of the
assumptions implied in its conception. Thus, for
instance, the argument is compounded of judgements,
but compound things cannot exist unless its component
elements mutually co-exist, as is pre-evident from
the case of a bed and similar objects; but the parts
of an argument do not mutually co-exist. For when
we are stating the first premiss, neither the second
premiss nor the inference is as yet in existence; and
when we are stating the second premiss, the first
is no longer existent and the inference is not yet
existent; and when we announce the inference, its
premisses are no longer in being. Therefore the parts
of the argument do not mutually co-exist; and hence
the argument too will seem to be non-existent.

But apart from this, the conclusive argument is
non-apprehensible; for if it is judged by the coherence
of the hypothetical premiss, and the coherence in
that premiss is a matter of unsettled dispute and is
probably non-apprehensible, as we suggested in our
chapter (xi.) ‟On the Sign,” then the conclusive
argument also will be non-apprehensible.

Now the Dialecticians assert that an argument is inconclusive
owing to inconsistency or to deficiency or to its being
propounded in a bad form or to redundancy. An
example of inconsistency is when the premisses are
not logically coherent with each other and with the
inference, as in the argument ‟If it is day, it is light;
but in fact wheat is being sold in the market; therefore
Dion is walking.”

And it is a case of redundancy
when we find a premiss that is superfluous for the logic
of the argument, as for instance ‟If it is day, it is
light; but in fact it is day and Dion also is walking;
therefore it is light.” And it is due to the bad form
in which it is propounded when the form of the argument 
is not conclusive; for whereas the really syllogistic 
arguments are, they say, such as these: ‟If it
is day, it is light; but in fact it is day; therefore it
is light;” and ‟If it is day, it is light; but it is not
light; therefore it is not day,”—the inconclusive
argument runs thus: ‟If it is day, it is light; but
in fact it is light; therefore it is day.”

For since the major premiss announces that if its antecedent exists
its consequent also exists, naturally when the antecedent 
is admitted the consequent also is inferred,
and when the consequent is denied the antecedent
also is denied; for if the antecedent had existed,
the consequent also would have existed. But when
the consequent is admitted, the antecedent is not
necessarily admitted as well; for the major premiss
did not promise that the antecedent should follow
the consequent, but only the consequent the
antecedent.

Hence, the argument which deduces the consequent
from the major premiss and the antecedent is
said to be syllogistic, and also that which deduces
the opposite of the antecedent from the major premiss
and the opposite of the consequent; but the argument
which, like that stated above, deduces the antecedent
from the major premiss and the consequent
is inconclusive, so that it makes a false deduction,
even though its premisses are true, whenever it is
uttered by lamplight at night. For though the
major premiss ‟If it is day, it is light” is true, and
also the minor premiss, ‟but in fact it is light,” the
inference ‟therefore it is day” is false.

And the argument is faulty by deficiency, when it suffers from
the omission of some factor needed for the deducing
of the conclusion: thus, for instance, while we have,
as they think, a valid argument in ‟Wealth is either
good or bad or indifferent; but it is neither bad nor
indifferent; therefore it is good,” the following
is faulty by way of deficiency: ‟Wealth is either
good or bad; but it is not bad; therefore it is good.”

If, then, I shall show that, according to them, it is
impossible to distinguish any difference between the
inconclusive and the conclusive arguments, I shall have
shown that the conclusive argument is non-apprehensible,
so that their endless disquisitions on ‟dialectic” 
are superfluous. And I show it in this wise.

It was said that the argument which is inconclusive
owing to inconsistency is recognized by the want of
coherence which marks its premisses in their relation
both to each other and to the inference. Since, then,
the recognition of this coherence ought to be preceded
by the judgement on the hypothetical syllogism, and
that syllogism, as I have argued, does not admit of
judgement, the argument that is inconclusive through
inconsistency will likewise be incapable of being 
distinguished.

For he who declares that any particular
argument is inconclusive through inconsistency will,
if he is merely uttering a statement, find himself
opposed by a statement which contradicts his own;
while if he tries to prove it by argument, he will be
told that this argument of his must itself be conclusive
before he can prove that the premisses of the argument
said to be inconsistent are devoid of consistency.
But we shall not know whether it is probative, since
we have no agreed test of the syllogism whereby
to judge whether the conclusion follows the logical
connexion formed by the premisses. And thus, also,
we shall be unable to distinguish the argument that
is faulty through inconsistency from those that are
conclusive.

And we will make the same reply to the man who 
says that an argument is unsound owing to its being
propounded in a faulty form; for he who maintains
that a form is unsound will have no argument agreed
to be conclusive whereby he will be able to draw the
conclusion he states.

And hereby we have also 
potentially refuted those who try to show that there
are arguments which are inconclusive through 
deficiency. For if the complete and finished argument
is indistinguishable from others , the deficient also
will be non-evident. And, further, he who proposes
to prove by argument that a certain argument is
deficient, seeing that he has no agreed test of a
hypothetical syllogism whereby he can judge the
coherence of the argument he is talking about, will
be unable to make a tested and true pronouncement
that it is deficient.

Moreover, the argument that is said to be faulty 
through redundancy is indistinguishable from those
that are probative. For, so far as concerns redundancy, 
even the ‟non-demonstrable” arguments so
much talked of by the Stoics will be found to be
inconclusive, and if they are demolished the whole of
dialectic is overturned; for they are the arguments
which, they say, need no proof to establish them,
and themselves serve as proofs of the conclusiveness
of the other arguments. And that they are 
redundant will be clear when we have set forth these
non-probative arguments and thus confirm our statement 
by reasoning.

Now there are, in their imaginings, many non- 
demonstrable arguments, but the five which they
chiefly propound, and to which all the rest can, it
seems, be referred, are these. The first is that which
deduces the consequent from the major premiss and
the antecedent, as for example ‟If it is day, it is
light; but in fact it is day; therefore it is light.” The
second is that which deduces the opposite of the
antecedent from the major premiss and the opposite of
the consequent, as for example ‟If it is day, it is
light; but it is not light; therefore it is not day.”

The third deduces from the negation of a coupled
premiss 
and the affirmation of one of its clauses the
opposite of the other clause, as for example ‟It is not
both night and day; but it is day; therefore it is
not night.” The fourth deduces from a disjunctive
premiss and one of its alternative clauses the opposite
of the other, as for example ‟Either it is day or it is
night; but it is day; therefore it is not night.” The
fifth deduces from a disjunctive premiss and the
opposite of one of its clauses the other clause, as for
example ‟Either it is day or it is night; but it is not
night; therefore it is day.”

These, then, are the much talked of non-demonstrable 
arguments, but they all seem to me to be
inconclusive through redundancy. Thus for instance,
to begin with the first, either it is agreed, or else it
is non-evident, that in the major premiss ‟If it is
day, it is light,” the clause ‟it is light” follows from
its antecedent ‟it is day.” But if this is non-evident,
we shall not grant the major premiss as agreed;
if, however, it is pre-evident that if the clause ‟it is
day” be true, the clause ‟it is light” will necessarily
be true also, then, once we have asserted that ‟it is
day,” the statement ‟it is light” is also inferred, so
that an argument in the form ‟It is day, therefore
it is light” is sufficient, and the major premiss ‟If
it is day, it is light” is redundant.

And in the case of the second non-demonstrable
argument we make a similar objection. For it is
either possible or impossible for the antecedent to be
true when the consequent is not true. But if this
is possible, the major premiss will not be valid;
while if it is impossible, at the moment of positing
‟Not the consequent” we posit also ‟Not the 
antecedent,” and the major premiss is redundant once
again, the argument propounded being ‟It is not
light, therefore it is not day.”

The same reasoning applies also to the third non-
demonstrable argument. For either it is pre-evident
that it is impossible for the clauses in the coupled
premiss mutually to co-exist, or else it is non-evident.
And if it is non-evident we shall not grant the negative
of the coupled premiss; but if it is pre-evident,
at the moment of positing the one clause the other
is annulled, and the negative of the coupled premiss
is redundant when we propound the argument in the
form ‟It is day, therefore it is not night.”

And we deal in like manner with the fourth non-
demonstrable argument and the fifth. For either it is
pre-evident or it is non-evident that in the disjunctive
premiss one clause is true, the other false, in complete
contradiction, as the disjunctive proclaims. And if
this is non-evident, we shall not grant the disjunctive;
but if it is pre-evident, if one of its clauses be affirmed
it is apparent that the other is not true, and if one
is negated it is pre-evident that the other is true, so
that it is sufficient to frame the argument thus—‟It
is day, therefore it is not night,” or ‟It is not day,
therefore it is night;” and the disjunctive premiss
is redundant.

One may also make similar observations on the so-
called ‟categorical” syllogisms, which are chiefly
used by the Peripatetics. Thus, for example, in the
argument—‟The just is fair, but the fair is good,
therefore the just is good,” either it is agreed and
pre-evident that ‟the fair is good,” or it is disputed
and is non-evident. But if it is non-evident, it will
not be granted in the process of deduction, and
consequently the syllogism will not be conclusive;
while if it is pre-evident that whatsoever is fair is also
without exception good, at the moment of stating
that this particular thing is fair the fact that it is
good is likewise implied, so that it is enough to put
the argument in the form ‟The just is fair, therefore
the just is good,” and the other premiss, in which it
was stated that ‟the fair is good,” is redundant.

So too in an argument such as this—‟Socrates is a man;
every man is an animal; therefore Socrates is an
animal,”—if it is not at once pre-evident that whatsoever 
is man is always also animal, the universal
premiss is not agreed, and neither will we admit it in
the process of deduction.

But if the fact that he is a
man is logically followed by the fact that he is also an
animal, and in consequence the premiss ‟Every man
is an animal” is by agreement true, at the moment of
stating that ‟Socrates is a man” we admit therewith
that he is also an animal, so that an argument in the
form ‟Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is an
animal” is sufficient, and the premiss ‟Every man is
an animal” is redundant.

And (not to dwell on the
matter now) in the case of the other primary categorical
arguments also it is possible to employ similar
methods of reasoning. 
 Since, however, these arguments which the 
Dialecticians lay down as the foundations of their 
syllogisms are redundant, by reason of this redundancy
the whole of Dialectic is thus far overthrown, seeing
that we cannot distinguish the redundant, and 
consequently inconclusive, arguments from what are called
the conclusive syllogisms.

But if some persons disapprove of arguments being of 
a ‟one-premiss form,” they deserve no more credence 
than does Antipater 
who does not reject such arguments. 
 For these reasons, then, the argument named by
the Dialecticians ‟conclusive” is not judged acceptable. 
But further, the ‟true” argument is indiscoverable
both for the foregoing reasons and because
it ought in all cases to end in truth. For the 
conlusion which is said to be true is either apparent
or non-evident.

And it is certainly not apparent;
for it would not need to be disclosed by means of the
premisses if it were perceptible of itself and no less
apparent than its premisses. But if it is non-evident,
then, since there is an unsettled dispute concerning
things non-evident, as we mentioned above, and they
are in consequence non-apprehensible, the conclusion
also of the argument said to be true will be non-
apprehensible. And if this is non-apprehensible,
we shall not know whether the deduction is true or
false. Thus we shall be in ignorance as to whether the
argument is true or false, and the ‟true” argument
will be indiscoverable.

But, to pass over these objections also, the 
argument which deduces what is non-evident by means
of pre-evident premisses is indiscoverable. For if the
inference follows from the combination of its premisses,
and what follows and forms the consequent is relative
and relative to the antecedent, and relatives are
apprehended, as we have shown, simultaneously,—
then, if the conclusion is non-evident, the premisses
also will be non-evident, while if the premisses are
pre-evident the conclusion also will be pre-evident,
as being apprehended along with the pre-evident
premisses, so that no longer is there a deduction of
what is non-evident from pre-evident premisses.

And for these reasons, neither is the inference revealed by
the premisses, as it is either non-evident and not
apprehended, or pre-evident and not in need of 
anything to reveal it. So that if proof is defined as ‟an
argument which by deduction, that is conclusively,
reveals a non-evident inference by means of certain
premisses agreed to be true,” while we have shown
that there exists no argument either conclusive or
true or which deduces a non-evident conclusion by
means of evident premisses or serves to reveal its
conclusion,—then it is apparent that proof is without
real existence.

That proof is unreal, or even inconceivable, we shall
discover also from the following line of attack. He
who asserts the existence of proof posits either a
general or a particular proof; but, as we shall suggest,
it is not possible to posit either the general or the
particular proof; and besides these no other can be
conceived; no one, therefore, can posit proof as really
existing.

Now the general proof is unreal for the
following reasons. It either has or has not certain
premisses and a certain inference. And if it has them
not, it is not even proof; while if it has premisses and
an inference, then, since everything which proves or is
proved in this way belongs to the class of ‟particulars,” 
proof will be particular; therefore no general
proof exists. Nor yet any particular proof.

For they will describe as proof either the system made up of
the premisses and the inference or only the system
of the premisses; but neither of these is proof, as I
shall show; therefore particular proof does not exist.

Now the system composed of the premisses and the
inference is not proof because, firstly, it contains a
non-evident part—that is to say, the inference—and
so will be non-evident, which is absurd; for if the
proof is non-evident, instead of serving to prove other
things it will itself be in need of something to prove it.

Moreover, since they assert that proof is a relative
thing and relative to the inference, and relatives, as
they themselves affirm, are conceived in relation to
other things, the thing proved must be other than
the proof ; if, then, the thing proved is the conclusion,
the proof will not be conceived along with the conclusion. 
For the conclusion either contributes something 
to its own proof or does not do so; but if it
contributes, it will serve to reveal itself, while if it
does not contribute but is redundant it will not be
even a part of the proof, since we shall declare the
proof to be faulty by reason of redundance.

Nor yet will the system composed of the premisses by itself
be proof; for who would maintain that a statement
in the form ‟If it is day, it is light; but in fact it is
day,” either is an argument or completely expresses
a piece of reasoning? So then, neither does the
system of the premisses alone constitute proof. Therefore
the particular proof has no real existence either.
But if neither the particular nor the general proof has
real existence, and besides these one can conceive
no other proof, then proof is without real existence.

And it is possible to show the unreality of proof 
from these further considerations. If proof exists,
either as apparent it serves to reveal what is apparent,
or as non-evident what is non-evident, or as non-
evident what is apparent, or as apparent what is
non-evident; but it cannot be conceived as serving
to reveal any of these; therefore it is inconceivable.

For if it as apparent serves to reveal the apparent,
the thing revealed will be at once both apparent and
non-evident—apparent because it was assumed to be
such, and non-evident because it needs a revealer
and is not clearly perceived by us of itself. And if
as non-evident it reveals the non-evident, it will itself
need something to reveal it and will not serve to
reveal other things, which is foreign to the conception
of proof.

And for these reasons neither can there 
be a non-evident proof of the pre-evident; nor yet
a pre-evident proof of the non-evident; for since
they are relatives, and relatives are apprehended
together, that which is said to be proved, being
apprehended together with its pre-evident proof, will
be pre-evident, so that the argument is reversed and
the proof probative of the non-evident is not found
to be pre-evident. If, therefore, proof is neither
apparent of the apparent, nor non-evident of the
non-evident, nor non-evident of the pre-evident, nor
pre-evident of the non-evident, and besides these, as
they say, there is no other alternative, then we
must declare that proof is nothing.

Furthermore, there is this also to be said. Proof 
is a matter of controversy; for some declare that it
does not even exist, as do those who assert that
nothing at all exists, but others, including the
majority of the Dogmatists, that it does exist; and
we affirm that it is ‟no more” existent than non-
existent.

And besides, proof always contains a 
dogma, and they are in dispute about every dogma,
so that there must necessarily be dispute about every
proof. For if (for the sake of argument) when the
proof for the existence of void is accepted the existence 
of void is likewise accepted, it is plain that
those who dispute the existence of void dispute its
proof also; and the same argument applies to all the
other dogmas with which the proofs are concerned.
Therefore every proof is questioned and is in dispute.

Since, then, proof is non-evident, owing to the 
controversy which exists concerning it (for things
controverted, in so far as controverted, are non-
evident), its existence is not self-evident but needs
to be established for us by proof. The proof, then,
by which proof is established will not be evident and
agreed (for we are now inquiring whether proof in
general exists), and being thus in dispute and non-
evident it will need another proof, and this again a
third, and so on ad infinitum. But it is impossible to
prove an infinite series; therefore it is impossible to
show that proof exists.

But neither can it be revealed by means of a sign.
For since it is a matter of inquiry whether sign
exists, and since the sign needs proof to ensure its
reality, we find ourselves involved in circular reasoning—
the proof requiring a sign, and the sign in turn
a proof; which is absurd. And for these reasons
neither is it possible to decide the controversy 
regarding proof, seeing that the decision requires a
criterion, but—because it is a matter of inquiry, as
we have shown, whether a criterion exists, and 
consequently the criterion needs a proof showing the
existence of a criterion—we are again involved in
the perplexity of circular reasoning.

If, then, neither by proof nor by sign nor by criterion it is possible to
show that proof exists, and it is not evident of itself
either, as we have shown, then it will be non-apprehensible 
whether proof exists. Consequently, proof
will also be unreal; for it is conceived together with
the act of proving, and were it not apprehended it
would be unable to prove. Wherefore proof will not
exist.

Thus much it will be enough to say by way of
outline and in criticism of proof. The Dogmatists,
however, maintaining the opposite view assert that
the arguments propounded against proof are either
probative or not probative; and if they are not
probative, they are incapable of showing that proof
does not exist; while if they are probative, they
themselves involve the reality of proof by self-
refutation.

Hence also they propound an argument
in this form: ‟If proof exists, proof exists; if
proof exists not, proof exists; but proof either exists
or exists not; therefore proof exists.” With the
same intention they propound also this argument:
‟That which follows logically from contradictories is
not only true but necessary; 'proof exists' and
'proof exists not' are contradictories, and the
existence of proof follows from each of them; therefore proof exists.”

Now to this we may reply, for instance, that, because
we do not believe that any argument is probative,
we do not assert either that the arguments against
proof are absolutely probative but that they appear
to us plausible; but those that are plausible are
not necessarily probative. Yet if they actually are
probative (which we do not positively affirm) they
certainly are also true. And true arguments are
those which deduce what is true by means of true
premisses; wherefore their inference is true. Now
the inference was this—‟therefore proof does not
exist;” therefore the statement ‟proof does not
exist” is true by reversing the argument.

And just as purgative medicines expel themselves together
with the substances already present in the body, so
these arguments are capable of cancelling themselves
along with the other arguments which are said to be
probative. Nor is this preposterous, since in fact
the saying ‟nothing is true” not only refutes every
other saying but also nullifies itself as well. 
 And as regards this argument—‟If proof exists,
proof exists; if proof does not exist, proof exists;
but it either exists or exists not; therefore it exists”
—there are a number of ways by which it can be
shown to be inconclusive, but for the moment the
following method may suffice.

If the hypothetical
premiss ‟If proof exists, proof exists” is valid, the
contradictory of its consequent, namely ‟proof does
not exist,” must conflict with ‟proof exists,” for this
is the antecedent of the hypothetical premiss. But,
according to them, it is impossible for a hypothetical
premiss to be valid when composed of conflicting
clauses. For the hypothetical premiss promises
that when its antecedent is true its consequent is
also true, whereas conflicting clauses contrariwise
promise that if either one of them is true the other
cannot possibly be true. If therefore the premiss
‟If proof exists, proof exists” is valid, the premiss
‟If proof exists not, proof exists” cannot be valid.

And again. conversely, if we grant by way of
assumption that the premiss ‟If proof exists not,
proof exists” is valid, then the clause ‟If proof
exists” can co-exist with ‟proof exists not.” But if
it can co-exist with it, it is not in conflict with it.
Therefore, in the premiss ‟If proof exists, proof
exists,” the contrary of its consequent is not in
conflict with its antecedent, so that, conversely,
this premiss will not be valid, as the former was
posited, by agreement, as valid.

And as the clause ‟proof exists not” is not in conflict with ‟proof
exists,” the disjunctive ‟Either proof exists or
proof exists not” will not be valid; for the valid
disjunctive promises that one of its clauses is valid,
but the other or others false and contradictory.
Or else, if the disjunctive be valid, the hypothetical
premiss ‟If proof exists not, proof exists” is, in
turn, found to be fallacious, as composed of conflicting
clauses. So then the premisses in the foregoing
argument are discordant and mutually destructive;
wherefore the argument is not valid.

And further, they are unable even to show that anything follows
logically from the contradictories, since, as we have
argued, they possess no criterion of logical 
consequence or deduction. 
 But this discussion is, in fact, superfluous. For if,
on the one hand, the arguments in defence of proof
are (let it be granted) plausible, while, on the other
hand, the criticisms directed against proof are also
plausible, then we must necessarily suspend judgement 
concerning proof also, and declare that proof is
‟no more” existent than non-existent.

So then it is also superfluous, perhaps, to discuss
in detail the much vaunted ‟syllogisms,” since, for
one thing, they are included in the refutation of the
existence of ‟proof” (for it is plain that if this is
non-existent there is no place either for probative
argument), and for another, we have implicitly 
contradicted them in our previous statements, when
in discussing redundancy we mentioned a certain
method by which it is possible to show that all the
probative arguments of the Stoics and the Peripatetics 
are really inconclusive.

Yet perhaps it will not
be amiss to go further and deal with them separately,
especially since these thinkers pride themselves upon
them. Now there is much that one can say by way
of suggesting their unreality, but in an outline sketch
it is sufficient to treat of them by the method which
follows. And I will deal at present with the axiomatic 
arguments; for if these are destroyed all the
rest of the arguments are overthrown as well, since
it is from these that they derive the proof of their
deductions.

Well then, the premiss ‟Every man is an animal”
is established by induction from the particular 
instances; for from the fact that Socrates, who is a
man, is also an animal, and Plato likewise, and Dion
and each one of the particular instances, they think
it possible to assert that every man is an animal;
so that if even a single one of the particulars should
apparently conflict with the rest the universal premiss
is not valid; thus, for example, when most animals
move the lower jaw, and only the crocodile the upper,
the premiss ‟Every animal moves the lower jaw” is
not true.

So whenever they argue ‟Every man is an
animal, and Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is
an animal,” proposing to deduce from the universal
proposition ‟Every man is an animal” the particular
proposition ‟Socrates therefore is an animal,” which
in fact goes (as we have mentioned) to establish by way
of induction the universal proposition, they fall into the
error of circular reasoning, since they are establishing
the universal proposition inductively by means of each
of the particulars and deducing the particular proposition 
from the universal syllogistically.

So likewise in the case of such an argument as ‟Socrates is a man, but
no man is four-footed, therefore Socrates is not four-
footed,” by proposing to establish the premiss ‟No
man is four-footed” by induction from the particular
instances while wishing to deduce each several particular 
from the premiss ‟No man is four-footed,” they
become involved in the perplexity of the circular
fallacy.

And a similar criticism may be passed upon the
rest of the ‟axiomatic” arguments, as they are
called by the Peripatetics; and also upon arguments
in the form ‟If it is day, it is light.” For the 
proposition ‟If it is day, it is light ” is capable, they say,
of proving that ‟it is light,” and the clause ‟it is
light” in conjunction with ‟it is day” serves to
establish the proposition ‟If it is day, it is light.”
For the hypothetical premiss stated above would not
have been considered valid unless the constant co-
existence of ‟it is light” with ‟it is day” had already
been observed.

If, then, one has to apprehend
beforehand that when there is day there certainly
is light also, in order to construct the hypothetical
premiss ‟If it is day, it is light,” while by means
of this premiss we deduce that when it is day it
is light, the co-existence of the being of day and of
night being proved (so far as depends on the axiomatic 
argument before us) by the premiss ‟If it
is day, it is light,” and that premiss in turn being
established by the co-existence of the facts aforesaid,
—in this case also the fallacy of circular reasoning
overthrows the substance of the argument.

So likewise with an argument in the form ‟If it is 
day, it is light; but it is not light; therefore it is not
day.” For from the fact that we do not observe day
without light the hypothetical premiss ‟If it is
day, it is light” might be considered to be valid;
just as if, should day, let us suppose, at some
time appear, without the appearance of light, the
premiss would be said to be false; but, so far as
concerns the axiomatic argument aforesaid, the non-
existence of day when light is non-existent is proved
by the premiss ‟If it is day, it is light,” so that
each of these statements needs for its confirmation
the secure grasp of the other in order thereby to
become credible by means of circular reasoning.

Moreover, from the fact that some things are
unable to co-exist—take, for instance, if you like, day
and night—both the conjunctive negation ‟Not day
exists and night exists” and the disjunctive ‟Either
day exists or night exists” might be considered to be
valid. But they consider that their non-co-existence is
established both by the negative of the conjunctive and
by the disjunctive, arguing ‟Not day exists and night
exists; but in fact night exists; day therefore exists
not;” and ‟Either it is day or it is night; but in
fact it is night; therefore it is not day,” or ‟it is not
night, therefore it is day.”

Whence we argue again
that if for establishing the disjunctive proposition and
the negative of the conjunctive we require to apprehend 
beforehand the fact that the judgements they
contain are incapable of co-existence, while they
believe that they are deducing this incapacity for
co-existence by means of both the disjunctive and
the negative conjunctive, we involve ourselves in
circular reasoning, seeing that we are unable either
to give credence to the aforesaid premisses without
having apprehended the incapacity for co-existence
of the judgements they contain, or to affirm
positively that incapacity before concluding the
syllogisms based on these premisses.

Consequently,as we possess no principle on which to ground belief
owing to the circular style of the argument, we shall
declare that, so far as depends on these statements,
neither the third nor the fourth nor the fifth of the
‟axiomatic” syllogisms possesses valid substance. 
 For the present, then, it will suffice to have said
thus much concerning syllogisms.

It is also easy, I consider, to set aside the method 
of induction. For, when they propose to establish
the universal from the particulars by means of induction, 
they will effect this by a review either of all
or of some of the particular instances. But if they
review some, the induction will be insecure, since
some of the particulars omitted in the induction may
contravene the universal; while if they are to review
all, they will be toiling at the impossible, since the
particulars are infinite and indefinite. Thus on both
grounds, as I think, the consequence is that induction
is invalidated.

Further, the Dogmatists take great pride in their 
systematic treatment of definitions, which they include
in the logical division of their Philosophical System,
as they call it. So come and let us now make a few
observations on definitions. 
 Now while the Dogmatists hold that definitions
have many uses, you will probably find that these fall
under two main heads which, as they say, include all
their necessary uses;

for, as they explain, definitions
are necessary in all cases either for apprehension or
for instruction. If, then, we shall show that they are
of use for neither of these purposes, we shall, I think,
bring to naught all the labour so vainly spent on them
by the Dogmatists.

So then, without preliminary, if, on the one hand, 
the man who knows not the object of definition is
unable to define the object unknown to him, while,
on the other hand, the man who knows and proceeds
to define has not apprehended the object from its
definition but has put together his definition to fit
the object already apprehended, then the definition
is not necessary for the apprehension of objects. And
since, if we propose to define absolutely all things,
we shall define nothing, because of the regress ad
infinitum; while if we allow that some things are
apprehended even without definitions, we are declaring 
that definitions are not necessary for apprehension,
seeing that we are able to apprehend all things
apart from definitions in the same way as the undefined 
objects were apprehended,

—then we shall 
either define absolutely nothing or we shall declare
that definitions are not necessary. 
 And for these reasons they are not necessary for instruction 
either, as we shall discover. For just as the man who first perceived 
the object perceived it apart from definition, so likewise the man 
who receives instruction about it can be instructed without 
definition.

Moreover, they judge the definitions by the objects 
defined and declare those definitions to be faulty which include 
any attributes not belonging either to all or to some of the objects 
defined. Hence, whenever one states that man is ‟a rational 
immortal animal” or ‟a rational mortal literary animal,” whereas no 
man is immortal, and some are not literary, such a definition they 
say is faulty.

And it may be also that the definitions do not admit of 
judgement owing to the infinity of the particulars by which they 
ought to be judged; and consequently they will not convey 
apprehension and instruction regarding the objects whereby they 
are judged, which evidently have been known beforehand, if at all, 
and apprehended beforehand. 
 And how could it be other than absurd to assert that definitions 
are of use for apprehension or instruction or elucidation of any 
kind, when they involve us in such a fog of uncertainty?

Thus, for instance, to take a ridiculous case, suppose that one wished to ask 
someone whether he had met a man riding a horse and leading a 
dog and put the question in this form—‟O rational mortal animal, 
receptive of intelligence and science, have you met with an animal 
capable of laughter, with broad nails and receptive of political 
science, a with his (posterior) hemispheres seated on a mortal 
animal capable of neighing, and leading a four-footed animal 
capable of barking?”—how would one be otherwise than 
ridiculous, in thus reducing the man to speechlessness concerning 
so familiar an object because of one’s definitions? 
 So then we must declare that, so far as we may
judge by this, the definition is useless,

whether it be described as ‟a statement which by a brief reminder
brings us to a conception of the objects which underlie
the terms,”—as is plain (is it not?) from what we
have said just a moment ago,—or as ‟a statement
declaratory of the essence,” or what you like. For
in fact, in their desire to propound a definition of the
definition they plunge into an endless controversy
which I now pass over, because of the plan of my
present treatise, although it seems to overthrow
definitions. 
 So what I have said about definitions is enough
for the present.

Inasmuch as some of the Dogmatists affirm that
‟Dialectic” is ‟a science dealing with syllogism,
induction, definition and division,” and, after our
arguments concerning the criterion and the sign and
proof, we have already discussed syllogisms and
induction as well as definitions, we deem that it will
not be amiss to treat shortly of ‟division” also.
Division then, as they allege, is effected in four ways:
either a name, or word, is divided into its significations,
or a whole into parts, or a genus into species, or a
species into particulars. But it is probably easy to
show that, on the contrary, in respect of none of these
does a divisive science exist.

Now they at once assert that the sciences of natural
objects exist whereas those of conventional objects
have no existence, and that with reason. For science
claims to be a thing that is firm and invariable, but
the conventional objects are easily liable to change
and variation, because their character is altered by
the shifting of the conventions which depend upon
ourselves. Since, then, the significance of names is
based on convention and not on nature (for otherwise
all men, barbarians as well as Greeks, would understand 
all the things signified by the terms, besides
the fact that it is in our power at any time to point
out and signify the objects by any other names we
may choose), how would it be possible for a science
capable of dividing a name into its significations to
exist? Or how could Dialectic really be, as some
imagine, a ‟science of things which signify and are
signified?”

Whole and part we shall discuss in what we call
our physical treatise, but at present we have to deal
with the so-called division of the whole into its parts.
When a man says that the decad is being divided into
one and two and three and four, the decad is not
being divided into these. For as soon as its first part,
say one, is subtracted—granting for the moment that
this can be done—there no longer subsists the decad
but the number nine, something quite different from
the decad.

Hence the division and the subtraction
of the other parts is not made from the decad but
from some other numbers, and these vary with each
subtraction. 
 Probably then it is impracticable to divide the
whole into what are called its parts. For, in fact, if
the whole is divided into parts, the parts ought to be
comprised in the whole before the act of division,
but probably they are not so comprised. Thus for
example—to base our argument once more on the
decad—they say that nine is certainly a part of the
decad, since it is divided into one plus nine. But so
likewise is the number eight, since it is divided into
eight plus two; and so also are the numbers seven,
six, five, four, three, two and one.

If then all these numbers are included in the decad, and when added
together with it make up fifty-five, then fifty-five is
included in the number ten, which is absurd. Therefore
neither are its so-called parts included in the decad
nor can the decad be divided into them, as a whole
into parts, since they are not even seen in it at all.

And the same objections will confront us in the case
of magnitudes also, supposing one should wish, for
example, to divide the magnitude of ten cubits.
Probably, then, it is not practicable to divide a whole
into parts.

There still remains, then, the subject of genera and 
species, which we shall discuss more at large elsewhere, 
but here we shall deal with them concisely.
If, on the one hand, they assert that genera and
species are mental concepts, our criticisms of the
‟regent part” and of ‟presentation” refute them;
whereas if they assign to them a substantiality of
their own, how will they reply to this objection?

If the genera exist, either they are equal in number to
the species or else there is one genus common to all
the species which are said to belong to it. If, then,
the genera are equal in number to their species, there
will no longer be a common genus to be divided into
the species; while if it shall be said that the genus
exists as one in all its species, then each species partakes
of either the whole or a part of it. But it certainly
does not partake of the whole; for it is impossible
that what is one real object should be equally included
in separate things in such a way as to appear as a
whole in each of those things in which it is said to
exist. And if it partakes of a part, then, in the first
place, all the genus will not, as they suppose, accompany
the species, nor will ‟man” be ‟an animal”
but a part of an animal—he will be substance, for
example, but neither animate nor sensitive.

Then, in the next place, all the species will be said to partake
either of the same part of their genus or of different
parts; but to partake of the same part is impossible
for the reasons stated above; while if they partake
of different parts, the species will be generically
dissimilar one to another (which they will not admit),
and each genus will be infinite because cut up into
infinite sections (not into the species only but also
into the particulars, since it is actually seen in these
along with its species; for Dion is said to be an
animal as well as a man). But if these consequences
are absurd, then not even by way of parts do the
species partake of their genus, it being a unity.

If, then, each several species partakes neither of
the whole genus nor of a part of it, how can it be said
that the one genus exists in all its parts so as to be
actually divided into them? No one, probably, could
make such a statement unless by concocting some
imaginary entities, which will be overturned, as the
attacks of the Sceptics show, by the unsettled disputes
of the Dogmatists themselves.

Furthermore, there is this to be said. The species 
are of this kind or of that kind: the genera of these
species either are of both this kind and that kind, or
of this kind but not of that kind, or neither of this
kind nor of that kind. When, for instance, of the
‟somethings” (or particulars) some are corporeal
others incorporeal, and some true others false, and
some (it may be) white others black, and some very
large others very small, and so on with the rest, the
genus ‟something” (to take it for the sake of argument), 
which some regard as the summum genus, will
either be all these or some of them or none.

But if the ‟something,” and the genus too, is absolutely
none of them, the inquiry comes to an end. And if
we should say that it is all of them, then, besides the
impossibility of such a statement, each of the species
and of the particulars wherein it exists will have to
be all. For just as when the genus ‟animal” is, as
they assert, ‟an animate sensitive substance,” each
of its species is said to be substance and animate and
sensitive, so likewise if the genus is both corporeal
and incorporeal and false and true and black, it may
be, and white and very small and very large, and all
the rest, each of the species and of the particulars will
be all these—which is contrary to observation. So
this too is false.

But if the genus is some of them
only, the genus of these will not be the genus of the
rest; if, for instance, the genus ‟something” is
corporeal it will not be that of the incorporeal, and if
the genus ‟animal” is rational it will not be that of
the irrational, so that there is neither an incorporeal
‟something” nor an irrational animal, and so likewise 
with all other cases; and this is absurd. Therefore 
the genus cannot be either of both this and that
kind, or of this kind but not of that, or of neither this
kind nor that; and if this be so, neither does the
genus exist at all. 
 And if one should say that the genus is potentially
all things, we shall reply that what is potentially
something must also be actually something, as, for
instance, no one can be potentially literary without
being so actually. So too, if the genus is potentially
all things, what, we ask them, is it actually? And
thus we find that the same difficulties remain. For
it cannot actually be all the contraries;

nor yet can it be some of them actually and some only potentially
—corporeal, for instance, actually and incorporeal
potentially. For it is potentially that which it is
capable of really being actually, but that which is
actually corporeal is incapable of becoming incorporeal 
in actuality, so that if, for example, the genus
‟something” is actually corporeal it is not potentially
incorporeal, and vice versa. It is impossible,
therefore, for the genus to be some things actually
and some only potentially. But if it is absolutely
nothing actually, it has no substantial existence.
Hence the genus, which they say they divide into
the species, is nothing.

And further, here is another point worthy of notice.
Just as, because Alexander and Paris are identical,
it is impossible that the statement ‟Alexander walks”
should be true when ‟Paris walks” is false, so also if
‟manhood” is identical for both Theon and Dion,
the term ‟man” when introduced as an element in
a judgement will cause the judgement to be equally
true or false in the case of both. But this is not what
we find; for when Dion is sitting and Theon walking,
the judgement ‟man walks” is true when used of
the one, but false of the other. Therefore the term 
‟man” is not common to them both and the same
for both but, if applicable at all, it is peculiar to one
of the two.

Similar arguments apply also to the ‟common
properties.” For if vision is one and the same
property in Dion and in Theon, then, suppose that
Dion should perish and Theon survive and retain his
sight, either they will assert that the vision of the
perished Dion remains unperished, which is incredible,
or they will declare that the same vision has both
perished and not perished, which is absurd; therefore
the vision of Theon is not identical with Dion’s but,
if anything, the vision of each is peculiar to himself.
And if breathing is an identical property in Dion and
Theon, it is impossible that breathing should exist
in Theon and not exist in Dion; but this is possible
when the one has perished and the other survives;
therefore it is not identical. 
 However, as regards this subject, this concise statement 
will be sufficient for the present.

It will not, perhaps, be amiss to give our attention
for a moment to the subject of Sophisms, seeing that
those who glorify Dialectic declare that it is
indispensable for exposing sophisms. For, they say, if
Dialectic is capable of distinguishing true and false
arguments, and sophisms are false arguments, it will
also be capable of discerning these, which distort the
truth by apparent plausibilities. Hence the dialecticians, 
by way of assisting life when it totters, strive
earnestly to teach us the conception of sophisms, their
differences and their solutions. They declare that a
sophism is ‟a plausible argument cunningly framed
to induce acceptance of the inference, it being either
false or resembling what is false or non-evident or
otherwise unacceptable.”

It is false, for example, 
in the case of the sophism ‟Nobody offers one a
predicate to drink; but ‟to drink absinth” is a
predicate; nobody therefore offers one absinth to
drink.” Or again, it may resemble the false, as in
this case—‟What neither was nor is possible is not
absurd; but it neither was nor is possible for a doctor,
qua doctor, to murder; therefore it is not absurd that
a doctor, qua doctor, should murder.”

Or again, it may be non-evident, as thus—‟It is not true both
that I have asked you a question first and that the
stars are not even in number; but I have asked you
a question first; therefore the stars are even.” Or
again, it may be otherwise unacceptable, like the
so-called solecistic arguments, such as—‟That at
which you look exists; but you have a frenzied look;
therefore 'frenzied' exists;” or ‟What you gaze at
exists; but you gaze at an inflamed spot; therefore
'at an inflamed spot' exists.”

Moreover, they attempt also to set forth solutions
of the sophisms, saying in the case of the first sophism
that one thing is established by the premisses and
another inferred in the conclusion. For it is established
that a predicate is not drunk and that ‟to drink
absinth” is a predicate, but not ‟absinth” by
itself. Hence, whereas one ought to infer ‟Nobody
therefore drinks the ‘to drink absinth,’” which
is true, the inference drawn is ‟Nobody therefore
drinks absinth,” which is false, as not deduced from
the established premisses.

And as regards the second sophism, they explain that while it seems to
lead in a false direction, so that it makes the inattentive 
hesitate in assenting to it, its conclusion is true,
namely ‟It is not therefore absurd that the doctor,
qua doctor, should murder.” For no judgement
is absurd, and ‟the doctor, qua doctor, murders”
is a judgement, so that neither is it absurd.

And the method of leading up to the non-evident deals,
they say, with the class of things that are variable. 
For when, according to the assumption, no previous
question has been asked, the negation of the 
conjunctive premiss is true, the conjunctive or major
premiss being false because of its inclusion of the false
clause ‟I have asked you a question first.” But
after the negation of the major has been asked, as the
minor premiss ‟I have asked you a question first”
has become true, owing to the fact that the negation
of the major has been asked before the minor premiss,
the first clause in the negation of the major becomes
false while the false clause in the major has become
true; so that it is never possible for the conclusion
to be deduced if the negation of the major premiss
does not co-exist with the minor premiss.

And as to the last class—the solecistic arguments—some
declare that they are introduced absurdly, contrary to
linguistic usage. 
 Such are the statements made by some of the
Dialecticians concerning sophisms—though others
indeed make other statements; and what they say may 
be able, perhaps, to tickle the ears of the casual hearer, 
superfluous though it is and the result of vain labour 
on their part. Probably this can be seen from what we have 
said already; 
for we have shown that truth and falsehood, according to the 
Dialecticians, cannot be apprehended, and that by a variety 
of arguments as well as by the refutation of their evidences 
for the validity of the syllogism, namely proof and axiomatic arguments.

And there are many other special objections bearing 
on the topic before us which we might mention, but now, 
for brevity’s sake, we mention only this one. 
 As regards all the sophisms which dialectic seems 
peculiarly able to expose, their exposure is useless; 
whereas in all cases where the exposure is useful, it 
is not the dialectician who will expose them but the 
experts in each particular art who grasp the connexion of the facts.

Thus, for instance, to mention one or two examples, 
if a sophism such as this were propounded—‟In diseases, 
at the stages of abatement, a varied diet and wine are 
to be approved; but in every type of disease an abatement 
inevitably occurs before the first third day; it is necessary, 
therefore, to take for the most part a varied diet and wine 
before the first third day,”—in this case the dialectician 
would be unable to assist in exposing the argument, useful though the exposure would be,

but the doctor will expose the sophism, since he knows 
that the term ‟abatement” is used in two senses, of the 
general ‟abatement” in the disease and of the tendency to 
betterment after the crisis in
the strained local conditions, and this improvement
in the local strain generally occurs before the first
third day, but it is not for this but for the general
abatement in the disease that we recommend the
varied diet. Consequently he will say that the
premisses are discordant, since one kind of ‟abatement”
is adopted in the first premiss, namely that
of the general condition, and another—that of the
local condition—in the second premiss.

Again, in the case of one who suffers from fever 
due to aggravated ‟contraction” or obstruction, if
an argument is propounded in the form—‟Opposites
are cures of opposites; cold is the opposite of the
present feverish condition; therefore cold is the
treatment which corresponds to the present feverish
condition,”—here again the dialectician will keep
silence,

but the doctor, since he knows what morbid 
states are fundamentally persistent and what are
symptoms of such states, will declare that the argument
does not apply to the symptoms (not to mention
the fact that the result of the application of cold is
to aggravate the feverish condition) but to the 
persistent morbid states, and that the constipation is
persistent but requires an expansive method of 
treatment rather than contraction, whereas the resultant
symptom of inflammation is not fundamentally persistent,
nor (consequently) is the state of cold which
seems to correspond thereto.

Thus, as regards sophisms the exposure of which is useful, 
the dialectician will not have a word to say, 
but he will propound for us arguments such as these 
—‟If it is not so that you both have fair horns and
have horns, you have horns; but it is not so that
you have fair horns and have horns; therefore you
have horns.”

‟If a thing moves, it moves either in 
the spot where it is or where it is not; but it moves
neither in the spot where it is (for it is at rest) nor
in that where it is not (for how could a thing be
active in a spot where it does not so much as exist?);
therefore nothing moves.”

‟Either the existent becomes or the non-existent; now the existent does
not become (for it exists); nor yet does the non-existent 
(for the becoming is passive but the non-existent is not passive); 
therefore nothing becomes.”

‟Snow is frozen water; but water is black; therefore 
snow is black.” 
 And when he has made a collection of such trash
he draws his eyebrows together, and expounds
Dialectic and endeavours very solemnly to establish
for us by syllogistic proofs that a thing becomes, a
thing moves, snow is white, and we do not have
horns, although it is probably sufficient to confront
the trash with the plain fact in order to smash up
their positive affirmation by means of the equipollent
contradictory evidence derived from appearances.
Thus, in fact, a certain philosopher, when the 
argument against motion was put to him, without a word
started to walk about; and people who follow the usual
way of life proceed on journeys by land and sea and
build ships and houses and beget children without paying 
any attention to the arguments against motion
and becoming.

And we are told of an amusing retort 
made by the physician Herophilus: he was a 
contemporary of Diodorus who, being given to juggling
with dialectic, used to promulgate sophistical 
arguments against motion as well as many other things.
So when Diodorus had dislocated his shoulder he
came to Herophilus to get treated, and the latter
jestingly said to him—‟Your shoulder has been put
out either in the place where it was or where it was
not; but it was put out neither where it was nor
where it was not; therefore it has not been put
out;” so that the Sophist begged him to leave such
arguments alone and apply the treatment prescribed
by medical art as suitable to his case.

For it is, I 
think, sufficient to conduct one’s life empirically and
undogmatically in accordance with the rules and
beliefs that are commonly accepted, suspending judgement 
regarding the statements derived from dogmatic
subtlety and furthest removed from the usage of
life. If, then, dialectic would fail to expose any of
the sophisms which might usefully be exposed, while
the exposure of all the sophisms which we might
perhaps grant it capable of exposing is useless,
then in respect of the exposure of sophisms dialectic
is useless.

Starting even from the actual statements made by 
the dialecticians one might show concisely in this wise
that their technical arguments about sophisms are
superfluous. The dialecticians assert that they have
resorted to the art of dialectic not simply for the sake
of ascertaining what is deduced from what but chiefly
for the sake of knowing how to discern the true and
the false by means of probative arguments. Thus
they declare that dialectic is ‟the science of what is
true and false and neither.”

Since, then, they assert
that a true argument is one which draws a true 
conclusion by means of true premisses, when an 
argument is propounded which has a false conclusion we
shall at once know that it is false and shall not yield
it assent. For the argument itself must either be
illogical or contain premisses that are not true.

The following considerations show this clearly: The false
conclusion in the argument either follows from the
combination formed by its premisses, or it does not
so follow. But if it does not so follow, neither will
the argument be logically sound; for an argument,
they say, is logically sound when its conclusion follows
from the combination formed by its premisses. If,
again, it does so follow, then—according to their own
technical treatises—the combination formed by its
premisses must necessarily be false; for they say that
the false follows from the false and nohow from the true.

And from what we have already said it is plain that 
according to them the argument which is not logically
sound or not true is not probative either. 
 If, then, when an argument is propounded with a
false conclusion we know at once that the argument
is neither true nor logically sound, because of its false
conclusion, we shall not assent to it, even if we fail
to see wherein the fallacy lies. For just as we refuse
our assent to the truth of the tricks performed by
jugglers and know that they are deluding us, even
if we do not know how they do it, so likewise we
refuse to believe arguments which, though seemingly
plausible, are false, even when we do not know how
they are fallacious.

Further, since the sophism leads, they say, not only
to falsehood but also to other absurdities, we must
discuss it more at large. The argument propounded
leads us either to an inadmissible conclusion or to one
of such a sort that we must needs admit it. In the
latter case we shall assent to it without absurdity;
but if it leads to what is inadmissible, it is not we that
ought to yield hasty assent to the absurdity because
of its plausibility, but it is they that ought to abstain
from the argument which constrains them to assent
to absurdities, if they really choose to seek truth, as
they profess, rather than drivel like children.

Thus, suppose there were a road leading up to a chasm, we
do not push ourselves into the chasm just because there
is a road leading to it but we avoid the road because
of the chasm; so, in the same way, if there should be
an argument which leads us to a confessedly absurd
conclusion, we shall not assent to the absurdity just
because of the argument but avoid the argument
because of the absurdity.

So whenever such an argument is propounded to us we shall suspend
judgement regarding each premiss, and when finally
the whole argument is propounded we shall draw
what conclusions we approve. 
 And if the Dogmatists of the School of Chrysippus
declare that when the ‟Sorites” is being propounded
they ought to halt while the argument is still proceeding
and suspend judgement, to avoid falling into absurdity,
much more, surely, would it be fitting for us, who are
Sceptics, when we suspect absurdity, to give no hasty
approval of the premisses propounded but rather to
suspend judgement about each until the completion
of the whole series which forms the argument.

And whereas we, by starting undogmatically from the
observation of practical life, thus avoid these fallacious
arguments, the Dogmatists will not be in a position
to distinguish the Sophism from the argument which
seems to be correctly propounded, seeing that they
have to pronounce dogmatically that the form of the
argument is, or is not, logically sound and also that
the premisses are, or are not, true.

For we have shown above that they are neither able to apprehend
the logically valid arguments nor yet capable of
deciding that a thing is true, since—as we have shown
from their own statements—they possess neither a
Criterion nor a Demonstration that commands general
agreement. Thus far, then, the technical treatment
of Sophisms so much talked of amongst the Dialecticians 
is otiose.

And we say much the same regarding the distinguishing
of ambiguities. For if the Ambiguity is a
word or phrase having two or more meanings, and it
is by convention that words have meaning, then all
such ambiguities as can be usefully cleared up—such,
that is, as occur in the course of some practical affair—
will be cleared up, not certainly by the dialectician,
but by the craftsmen trained in each several art, as
they have personal experience of the conventional
way adopted by themselves of using the terms to
denote the objects signified

—as, for example, in the case of the ambiguity ‟In periods of abatement one
should sanction a varied diet and wine.” And in
the ordinary affairs of life we see already how people
—ay, and even the slave-boys—distinguish ambiguities 
when they think such distinction is of use.
Certainly, if a master who had servants named alike
were to bid a boy called, say, ‟Manes” (supposing
this to be common name for a servant) to be summoned, 
the slave-boy will ask ‟Which one?” And
if a man who had several different wines were to
say to his boy ‟Pour me out a draught of wine,”
then too the boy will ask ‟Which one?”

Thus it is the experience of what is useful in each affair that
brings about the distinguishing of ambiguities. 
 All such ambiguities, however, as are not involved
in the practical experiences of life but in dogmatic
opinions, and are no doubt useless for a life void of
dogmatism,—concerning these the Dialectician, in
his own peculiar position, will be similarly forced,
in view of the Sceptic attacks, to suspend judgement, 
in so far as they are probably linked up with
matters that are non-evident and non-apprehensible,
or even non-substantial.

This subject, however, we shall discuss later on;
 
and if any Dogmatist should attempt to refute any of 
our statements he will be strengthening the Sceptic 
argument by adding support to their suspension of 
judgement about the matters in question as a result 
of our mutual antagonism and interminable dissension. 
 Having said thus much concerning ambiguities we
now conclude therewith our Second Book of Outlines.

Concerning the logical division of what is called ‟Philosophy” the foregoing account may suffice by way of outline.

Pursuing the same method of exposition in our
investigation of the Physical division of Philosophy,
we shall not refute each of their statements in order,
but we shall endeavour to overthrow those of a more
general character wherein the rest also are included. 
 Let us begin with their doctrine of Principles.

Since it is agreed by most that of Principles some
are material and some efficient, we shall make our
argument start with the efficient; for these, as they
assert, are superior to the material.

Since, then, the majority have declared that God
is a most efficient Cause, let us begin by inquiring
about God, first premising that although, following
the ordinary view, we affirm undogmatically that
Gods exist and reverence Gods and ascribe to them
foreknowledge, yet as against the rashness of the
Dogmatists we argue as follows. 
 When we conceive objects we ought to form 
conceptions of their substances as well, as, for instance,
whether they are corporeal or incorporeal. And also
of their forms; for no one could conceive ‟Horse”
unless he had first learnt the horse’s form. And
of course the object conceived must be conceived
 as existing somewhere.

Since, then, some of the Dogmatists assert that God is corporeal, others that
he is incorporeal, and some that he has human form,
others not, and some that he exists in space, others
not; and of those who assert that he is in space some
put him inside the world, others outside; how shall
we be able to reach a conception of God when we have
no agreement about his substance or his form or his
place of abode? Let them first agree and consent
together that God is of such and such a nature, and
then, when they have sketched out for us that nature,
let them require that we should form a conception of
God. But so long as they disagree interminably, we
cannot say what agreed notion we are to derive
from them.

But, say they, when you have conceived of a Being
imperishable and blessed, regard this as God. But
this is foolish; for just as one who does not know Dion
is unable also to conceive the properties which belong
to him as Dion, so also when we do not know the
substance of God we shall also be unable to learn
and conceive his properties.

And apart from this, let them tell us what a ‟blessed” thing is—whether it is
that which energizes according to virtue and foreknows 
what is subject to itself, or that which is void
of energy and neither performs any work itself nor
provides work for another. For indeed about this
also they disagree interminably and thus render
‟the blessed” something we cannot conceive, and
therefore God also.

Further, in order to form a conception of God one 
must necessarily—so far as depends on the Dogmatists
—suspend judgement as to his existence or
non-existence. For the existence of God is not 
pre-evident. For if God impressed us automatically,
the Dogmatists would have agreed together regarding 
his essence, his character, and his place; whereas
their interminable disagreement has made him seem
to us non-evident and needing demonstration.

Now he that demonstrates the existence of God does so by
means of what is either pre-evident or non-evident.
Certainly not, then, by means of the pre-evident;
for if what demonstrates God’s existence were pre-evident, 
then—since the thing proved is conceived
together with that which proves it, and therefore is
apprehended along with it as well, as we have 
established —God’s existence also will be pre-evident, it
being apprehended along with the pre-evident fact
which proves it. But, as we have shown, it is not
pre-evident; therefore it is not proved, either, by a
pre-evident fact. Nor yet by what is non-evident.

For if the non-evident fact which is capable of proving
God’s existence, needing proof as it does, shall be said
to be proved by means of a pre-evident fact, it will
no longer be non-evident but pre-evident. Therefore
the non-evident fact which proves his existence is not
proved by what is pre-evident. Nor yet by what is
non-evident; for he who asserts this will be driven
into circular reasoning when we keep demanding
proof every time for the non-evident fact which he
produces as proof of the one last propounded. 
Consequently, the existence of God cannot be proved
from any other fact.

But if God’s existence is neither 
automatically pre-evident nor proved from another
fact, it will be inapprehensible. 
 There is this also to be said. He who affirms that
God exists either declares that he has, or that he has
not, forethought for the things in the universe, and
in the former case that such forethought is for all
things or for some things. But if he had forethought
for all, there would have been nothing bad and no
badness in the world; yet all things, they say, are full
of badness; hence it shall not be said that God forethinks
all things.

If, again, he forethinks some, why
does he forethink these things and not those? For
either he has both the will and the power to forethink
all things, or else he has the will but not the power, or
the power but not the will, or neither the will nor the
power. But if he had had both the will and the
power he would have had forethought for all things;
but for the reasons stated above he does not forethink
all; therefore he has not both the will and the power
to forethink all. And if he has the will but not the
power, he is less strong than the cause which renders
him unable to forethink what he does not forethink:

but it is contrary to our notion of God that he should
be weaker than anything. And if, again, he has the
power but not the will to have forethought for all, he
will be held to be malignant; while if he has neither
the will nor the powers he is both malignant and weak
—an impious thing to say about God. Therefore
God has no forethought for the things in the universe. 
 But if he exercises no forethought for anything, and
there exists no work nor product of his, no one will be
able to name the source of the apprehension of God’s
existence, inasmuch as he neither appears of himself
nor is apprehended by means of any of his products.
So for these reasons we cannot apprehend whether
God exists.

And from this we further conclude that 
those who positively affirm God’s existence are probably 
compelled to be guilty of impiety; for if they
say that he forethinks all things they will be declaring
that God is the cause of what is evil, while if they say
that he forethinks some things or nothing they will
be forced to say that God is either malignant or weak,
and obviously this is to use impious language.

To prevent the Dogmatists attempting also to 
slander us, because of their inability to refute us
in a practical way, we shall discuss the question of
the efficient Cause more at large when we have first
tried to give attention to the conception of Cause.
Now so far as the statements of the Dogmatists are
concerned, it would be impossible for anyone even to
conceive Cause, since, in addition to offering 
discrepant and contradictory conceptions of Cause, they
have rendered its substance also indiscoverable by
their disagreement about it.

For some affirm Cause 
to be corporeal, others incorporeal. In the broad
sense, a Cause would seem to be, according to them,
‟That by whose energizing the effect comes about;” 
as, for example, the sun or the sun’s heat is the cause
of the wax being melted or of the melting of the
wax. For even on this point they are at variance,
some declaring that Cause is causal of nouns, such as
‟the melting,” others of predicates, such as ‟being
melted.” Hence, as I said, in the broad sense Cause
will be ‟that by whose energizing the effect comes
about.”

The majority of them hold that of these Causes 
some are immediate, some associate, some co-
operant; and that causes are ‟immediate” when
their presence involves the presence, and their 
removal the removal, and their decrease the decrease,
of the effect (it is thus, they say, that the fixing on
of the halter causes the strangling); and that an
‟associate” cause is one which contributes a force
equal to that of its fellow-cause towards the production 
of the effect (it is thus, they say, that each of the
oxen which draw the plough is a cause of the drawing
of the plough); and that a ‟co-operant” cause is
one which contributes a slight force towards the easy
production of the effect, as in the case when two men
are lifting a heavy load with difficulty the assistance
of a third helps to lighten it.

Some of them, however, have asserted further that 
things present are causes of things future, being
‟antecedents;” as when intense exposure to the
sun causes fever. But this view is rejected by some,
on the ground that, since the Cause is relative to
something existent and to a real effect, it cannot
precede it as its cause. 
 As regards this controversy, our position is as
follows:

That Cause exists is plausible; for how could
there come about increase, decrease, generation,
corruption, motion in general, each of the physical
and mental effects, the ordering of the whole universe,
and everything else, except by reason of some cause? 
For even if none of these things has real existence, 
we shall affirm that it is due to some cause that they
appear to us other than they really are.

Moreover, if cause were non-existent everything would have been
produced by everything and at random. Horses,
for instance, might be born, perchance, of flies,
and elephants of ants; and there would have been
severe rains and snow in Egyptian Thebes, while the
southern districts would have had no rain, unless
there had been a cause which makes the southern
parts stormy, the eastern dry.

Also, he who asserts that there is no Cause is refuted; for if he says that
he makes this assertion absolutely and without any
cause, he will not win credence; but if he says that
he makes it owing to some cause, he is positing
Cause while wishing to abolish it, since he offers us
a cause to prove the non-existence of Cause. 
 For these reasons, then, the existence of Cause is
plausible.

But that it is also plausible to say that 
nothing is the Cause of anything will be evident when
we have set forth, to suit the occasion, a few of the
many arguments which go to prove this case. Thus
it is, for example, impossible to conceive the Cause
before apprehending its effect as its effect; for we only
recognize that it is causative of the effect when we
apprehend the latter as an effect.

But we cannot either apprehend the effect of the Cause as its effect
unless we apprehend the Cause of the effect as its
Cause; for we think we know that it is its effect only
when we have apprehended the Cause of it as its
Cause.

If, then, in order to conceive the Cause, we 
must first know the effect, while in order to know
the effect we must, as I said, have previous knowledge
of the Cause, the fallacy of this circular mode of
reasoning proves both to be inconceivable, the Cause
being incapable of being conceived as Cause, and the
effect as effect. For since each of them needs the
evidence of the other, we shall not be able to say
which conception is to have the precedence. Hence
we shall be unable to declare that anything is the
Cause of anything.

And even were one to grant that Cause can be 
conceived, it might be held to be inapprehensible
because of the divergency of opinion. For he who
says that there is some Cause of something either
asserts that he makes this statement absolutely and
without basing it on any rational cause, or else he will
declare that he has arrived at his conviction owing
to certain causes. If, then, he says that he states it
‟absolutely,” he will be no more worthy of credence
than the man who asserts ‟absolutely” that nothing
is a cause of anything; whereas if he shall mention
causes on account of which he holds that something
causes something, he will be attempting to support
the matter in question by means of that matter itself;
for when we are examining the question whether
anything is the Cause of anything, he asserts that
Cause exists since there exists a cause for the existence
of Cause.

Besides, since we are inquiring about the 
reality of Cause, it will certainly be necessary for him
to produce a cause for the cause of the existence of
Cause, and of that cause yet another, and so on ad
infinitum. But it is impossible to produce causes
infinite in number. It is impossible, therefore, to
affirm positively that anything is Cause of anything.

Moreover, the Cause, when it produces the effect,
either is and subsists already as causal or is non-causal.
Certainly it is not non-causal; while if it is causal, it
must first have subsisted and become causal, and
thereafter produces the effect which is said to be
brought about by it as already existing Cause. But
since the Cause is relative and relative to the effect,
it is clear that it cannot be prior in existence to the
latter; therefore not even as being causal can the
Cause bring about that whereof it is Cause.

And if it does not bring about anything either as being or as
not being causal, then it does not bring anything
about; and hence it will not be a Cause; for apart
from its effecting something the Cause cannot be
conceived as Cause. 
 Hence some people argue thus: The Cause must
either subsist along with its effect or before it or must
come into being after it. Now to say that the Cause
is brought into existence after the appearance of its
effect would seem ridiculous. But neither can it subsist
before the effect; for it is said to be conceived in relation
thereto, and they affirm that relatives,

in so far as they are relative, co-exist with each other and are
conceived together. Nor, again, can it subsist along
with its effect; for if it is productive of the effect,
and what comes into existence must so come by the
agency of what exists already, the Cause must have
become causal first, and this done, then produces its
effect. If, then, the Cause neither subsists before its
effect, nor subsists along with it, nor does the effect
precede the Cause, it would seem that it has no
substantial existence at all.

And it is clear probably that by these arguments the conception of Cause is
overthrown again. For if Cause as a relative notion
cannot be conceived before its effect, and yet, if it is
to be conceived as causative of its effect, it must be
conceived before its effect, while it is impossible for
anything to be conceived before that which the
conception of it cannot precede,—then it is impossible for
the Cause to be conceived.

From all this we conclude finally that—if the 
arguments by which it was shown that we ought to
affirm the existence of Cause are plausible, and if the
arguments which go to prove that it is improper to
declare that any Cause exists are likewise plausible,
and if it is inadmissible to prefer any of these arguments 
to the others, since, as we have shown above, 
we confessedly possess neither sign nor criterion nor
proof,—we are compelled to suspend judgement concerning 
the real existence of Cause, declaring that
a Cause is ‟no more” existent than non-existent,
if we are to judge by the statements made by the
Dogmatists.

So far, then, as concerns the efficient Principle this 
account will suffice for the present. But we must also
give a brief account of what are called the Material
Principles. Now that these are inapprehensible may
easily be gathered from the disagreement which
exists about them amongst the Dogmatists. For
Pherecydes of Syros declared earth to be the
Principle of all things; Thales of Miletus, water;
Anaximander (his pupil), the Unlimited; Anaximenes
and Diogenes of Apollonia, air; Hippasus of
Metapontum, fire; Xenophanes of Colophon, earth
and water; Oenopides of Chios, fire and air; Hippo
of Rhegium, fire and water; Onomacritus, in his
Orphica, fire and water and earth;

the School of Empedocles as well as the Stoics, fire, air, water and
earth—for why should one even mention that 
mysterious ‟indeterminate matter” which some of
them talk about, when not even they themselves
are positive that they apprehend it? Aristotle
the Peripatetic takes as his Principles fire, air,
water, earth, and the ‟revolving body;”

Democritus and Epicurus, atoms; Anaxagoras of Clazomenae,
homoeomeries ; Diodorus, surnamed Cronos, minimal
and non-composite bodies; Heracleides Ponticus and
Asclepiades the Bithynian, homogeneous masses;
the School of Pythagoras, the numbers; the Mathematicians,
the limits of bodies; Strato the Physicist,
the qualities.

Since, then, there exists amongst them as much 
divergence as this, and even more, regarding the
Material Principles, we shall give assent either to all
the positions stated, and all others as well, or to some
of them. But to assent to all is not possible; for
we certainly shall not be able to assent both to
Asclepiades, who says that the elements can be
broken up and possess qualities, and to Democritus,
who asserts that they are indivisible and
void of quality, and to Anaxagoras, who leaves
every sensible quality attached to the homoeomeries.

Yet if we shall prefer any one standpoint, or view, 
to the rest, we shall be preferring it either 
absolutely and without proof or with proof. 
Now without proof we shall not yield assent; and if it is to
be with proof, the proof must be true. But a true
proof can only be given when approved by a true
criterion, and a criterion is shown to be true by
means of an approved proof.

If, then, in order to show the truth of the proof which prefers any
one view, its criterion must be proved, and to prove
the criterion in turn its proof must be pre-established,
the argument is found to be the circular one
which will not allow the reasoning to go forward,
since the proof keeps always requiring a proved
criterion, and the criterion an approved proof.

And should any one propose to approve the criterion by a
criterion and to prove the proof by a proof, he will
be driven to a regress ad infinitum. Accordingly, if
we are unable to assent either to all the views
held about the elements or to any one of them, it is
proper to suspend judgement about them.

Now though it is, perhaps, possible to show by 
these arguments alone the inapprehensibility of the
elements and of the Material Principles, yet in order
that we may be able to refute the Dogmatists in a
more comprehensive manner we shall dwell on this
topic at appropriate length. And since the opinions
about the elements are, as we have shown, numerous
and well-nigh infinite, we will excuse ourselves—
because of the character of our present treatise—
from discussing each opinion in detail, but will make
answer to them all implicitly. For since the elements,
whatever view one takes of them, must be finally
regarded either as corporeal or incorporeal, we think
it enough to show that corporeal things are inapprehensible
and incorporeal things inapprehensible; for
thus it will be clear that the elements also are
inapprehensible.

Some say that Body is that which is capable of 
being active or passive. But so far as this conception
goes it is inapprehensible. For, as we have
shown, Cause is inapprehensible; and if we cannot
say whether any Cause exists, neither can we say
whether anything passive exists; for what is passive
is certainly made passive by a Cause. And when both
the Cause and the passive object are inapprehensible,
the result will be that Body also is inapprehensible.

But some define Body as what has three dimensions
combined with resistance or solidity. For they 
describe the point as that which has no parts, the line
as length without breadth, the surface as length with
breadth; and when this takes on both depth and
resistance there is formed Body—the object of our
present discussion—it being composed of length and
breadth and depth and resistance.

The answer, however, to these people is simple. For they will
say either that Body is nothing more than these
qualities, or that it is something else than the 
combination of the qualities already mentioned. Now
apart from length and breadth and depth and solidity
the Body would be nothing; but if these things are
the Body, anyone who shall prove that they are
unreal will likewise abolish the Body; for wholes are
abolished along with the sum of their parts. 
 Now it is possible to disprove these dimensions in a
variety of ways; but for the present it will be enough
to say that if the Limits exist, they are either lines
or surfaces or bodies.

If, then, one should affirm the 
existence of a surface or a line, then it will be affirmed
that each of the afore-mentioned objects either can
subsist of itself or is cognized solely in connexion
with so-called Bodies. But to imagine either a line
or a surface as existing of itself is doubtless silly.
While if it should be said that each of these objects
is cognized solely in connexion with the Bodies and
has no independent existence, it will thereby be
granted, in the first place, that the Bodies are not
generated from them (for if so, I suppose, these
objects ought to have had independent existence first,
and then have combined to form the Bodies);

and further, they have no real existence even in the so-called Bodies. 
 This can be shown by several arguments, but for
the present it will suffice to mention the difficulties
which arise from the fact of touch. For if juxtaposed
Bodies touch one another they are in contact
with their Limits—for example, with their surfaces.
The surfaces, then, will not be completely unified one
with another as a result of touching, since otherwise
touch would be fusion and the separation of things
touching a rending apart; and this is not what we
find.

And if the surface touches the surface of the 
juxtaposed Body with some of its parts, and with
other parts is united with the Body of which it is a
limit, it will not be without depth, since its parts
are conceived as different in respect of depth, one
part touching the juxtaposed Body, the other being
that which effects its union with the Body whereof
it is a limit . Hence, even in connexion with Body
one cannot imagine length and breadth without
depth, nor, consequently, surface. 
 So likewise when two surfaces are, let us imagine,
juxtaposed along the limits where they come to an
end, by way of what is called their ‟length,” that is to
say by way of their ‟lines,” then these lines, by means
of which the surfaces are said to touch each other,
will not be unified (else they would be fused together); 
yet if each of them touches the line which
lies next to it breadth-wise with some of its parts
and by others is united with the surface of which it
is a limit, it will not be without breadth, and, 
consequently, it will not be a line. But if there exists
in Body neither line nor surface, neither length nor
breadth nor depth will exist in Body.

And should anyone assert that the Limits are
bodies, he can be answered very shortly. For if
length is a body, it must needs be divided into its
three dimensions, and each of these, in turn, being a
body will be divided into three other dimensions,
which will be bodies, and these likewise into others,
and so on ad infinitum, so that the Body comes to be
of infinite size, being divided into an infinity of parts:
this result is absurd, and therefore the dimensions
aforesaid are not bodies. But if they are neither
bodies nor lines nor surfaces, they will be held to have
no existence.

Solidity also is inapprehensible. For if it is
apprehended, it must be apprehended by touch. If,
then, we shall prove that touch is inapprehensible, it
will be clear that it is impossible for solidity to be
apprehended. That touch is inapprehensible we
argue as follows. Things which touch one another
either touch with their parts or as wholes touching
wholes. Now they certainly will not touch as wholes;
for then they will be unified instead of being in
contact with one another. Nor yet through parts
touching parts; for their parts, though in relation to
the wholes they are parts, are wholes in relation
to their parts.

So these wholes, which are parts of 
other things, will not touch as wholes touching wholes,
for the reasons aforesaid, nor yet through parts
touching parts; for their parts, too, being wholes
relatively to their own parts, will not be in contact
either as wholes with wholes or as parts with parts.
But if we apprehend the occurrence of touch neither
by way of wholeness nor by way of parts, touch will be
inapprehensible. And, consequently, solidity also;
and, therefore, Body; for if this is nothing more than
the three dimensions plus Solidity, and we have
proved that each of these is inapprehensible, Body
also will be inapprehensible. 
 Thus, then, if we are to judge by the conception of
Body, it is inapprehensible whether any body exists;

and about this problem there is this also to be said.
Of existing things some, they say, are sensible, others
intelligible, and the latter are apprehended by the
reason, the former by the senses, and the senses are
‟simply-passive,” while the reason proceeds from
the apprehension of sensibles to the apprehension
of intelligibles. If then any body exists, it is either
sensible or intelligible. Now it is not sensible; for it
is supposed to be apprehended as a conglomeration of
length and depth and breadth and solidity and colour
and various other things, along with which it is 
experienced; whereas, according to their statements,
the senses are ‟simply-passive.”

And if Body is said to be intelligible, there must certainly be pre-existent
in the nature of things some sensible object from
which to derive the notion of bodies, they being
intelligible. But nothing exists save Body and the
Incorporeal, and of these the Incorporeal is essentially 
intelligible, and Body, as we have shown, is not
sensible. Since, then, no sensible object exists in the
nature of things from which we can derive the notion
of Body, Body will not be intelligible either. And if
it is neither sensible nor intelligible, and besides these
nothing else exists, we must declare that, so far as this
argument goes, Body has no existence.

Accordingly we, by thus opposing the arguments against Body to
the apparent existence of Body, infer suspension of
judgement concerning Body. 
 The inapprehensibility of Body involves also that
of the Incorporeal. For privations are conceived as
privations of states or faculties, as, for example, blindness 
of sight, deafness of hearing, and similarly with
the rest. Hence, in order to apprehend a privation,
we must first have apprehended the state of which
the privation is said to be a privation; for if one had
no conception of sight one would not be able to assert
that this man does not possess sight, which is the
meaning of being blind.

If then Incorporeality is the privation of Body, and when states are not apprehended 
it is impossible for the privations of them to
be apprehended, and it has been proved that Body
is inapprehensible, Incorporeality also will be
inapprehensible. Moreover, it is either sensible or
intelligible. And if it is sensible, it is inapprehensible
because of the variance amongst animals and men,
the senses and the circumstances, and owing to the 
admixtures and all the other things we have previously
described in our exposition of the Ten Tropes. If,
again, it is intelligible, since the apprehension of
sensibles, which is supposed to form the starting-point
from which we attain to the intelligibles, is not
immediately given, neither will the apprehension of
the intelligibles be given immediately, nor, 
consequently, that of Incorporeality.

Also, he who asserts that he apprehends the 
Incorporeal will maintain that he apprehends it either
by sense or by means of reason. Certainly not by
sense, since it is supposed that the senses perceive
the sensibles by way of ‟impression” and ‟indentation,”
—take sight, for instance, whether it occur by
reason of the tension of a cone, or of the emissions and
immissions of images, or by effusions of rays or
colours; and hearing too, whether it be the smitten
air or the parts of the sound that are carried round
the ears and smite the acoustic breath so as to effect
the perception of sound. Smells also impinge on the
nose and flavours on the tongue, and likewise objects
of touch on the sense of touch.

But incorporeals are incapable of submitting to impression
of this kind, so that they could not be apprehended by sense. 
 Nor yet by means of reason. For if the reason
is ‟verbally expressible” and incorporeal, as the
Stoics assert, he who says that incorporeals are
apprehended by means of reason is begging the
question, For when our question is—‟Can an
incorporeal object be apprehended?” he assumes an
incorporeal object and then, by means of it alone,
claims to effect the apprehension of incorporeals. Yet
reason itself, if it is incorporeal, belongs to the class
of things which are in question.

How, then, is one to prove that this particular incorporeal (I mean reason)
is previously apprehended? For if it is by means of
another incorporeal, we shall ask for the proof of its
apprehension also, and so on ad infinitum; whereas, if
it is by means of a body, the apprehension of bodies
is also in question; by what means, then, are we
to prove that the body which is assumed in order to
prove the apprehension of the incorporeal reason is
itself apprehended? If by means of a body, we are
plunged into infinite regress; while if we do so by
means of an incorporeal, we are wrecked on circular
reasoning. Reason, then, since it is incorporeal,
remaining thus inapprehensible, no one will be able to
say that by means of it the incorporeal is 
apprehended.

But if reason is a body, inasmuch as about bodies 
also there is much controversy as to whether or not
they are apprehended, owing to what is called their
‟continual flux,” which gives rise to the view that
they do not admit of the title ‟this” and are non-
existent—just as Plato speaks of bodies as ‟becoming
but never being,”—I am perplexed as to how
this controversy about Body is to be settled, as I see
that it cannot be settled, because of the difficulties
stated a moment ago, either by a body or by an
incorporeal. Neither, then, is it possible to 
apprehend the incorporeals by reason.

And if they are neither objects of sense nor apprehended 
by means of reason, they will not be apprehended at all. 
 If, then, it is impossible to be positive either
about the existence of Body or about the 
Incorporeals, we must also suspend judgement 
concerning the Elements, and possibly about the things
which lie behind the Elements as well, seeing that
of these some are bodies, others incorporeals, and
both of these are matters of doubt. In fact, when
both the active and the material Principles, for these
reasons, call for suspense of judgement, the doctrine
of Principles is open to doubt.

But, to pass over these problems, how do they 
explain the production of the compounds from the
primary elements, when neither contact and touch
nor mixture or blending has any existence at all?
For that touch is nothing I showed a moment ago,
when I was discussing the subsistence of Body; and
that the method of Mixture is equally impossible on
their own showing, I shall briefly demonstrate. For
there is much argument about Mixture, and the rival
views held by the Dogmatists on the problem propounded
are well-nigh endless; and hence we might
straightway infer, along with the indeterminable 
controversy, the inapprehensibility of the problem. And
we shall for the moment, owing to the design of our
treatise, excuse ourselves from answering all their
views in detail, deeming that the following remarks
will amply suffice for the present.

They declare that mixed things are composed of 
substance and qualities. If so, one must declare
either that their substances are blended but not
their qualities, or their qualities blended but not their
substances any longer, or neither blended with the
other, or both unified with each other. But if neither
the qualities nor the substances are blended with one
another, Mixture will be inconceivable; for how will
a single sensation result from the things mixed if the
things mixed are blended with one another in none
of the ways stated above?

And if it should be said that the qualities are simply juxtaposed and the
substances blended, even so the statement would be
absurd; for we do not perceive the qualities in the
mixtures as separate objects but as a single sense-
impression produced by the mixed things. And anyone
who should assert that the qualities are blended,
but the substances not, would be asserting the 
impossible; for the reality of the qualities resides in
the substances, so that it would be ridiculous to
assert that the qualities by themselves, in separation
from the substances, are somehow blended with one
another, while the substances are left apart void of
quality.

It only remains to say that both the qualities and
the substances of the mixed things permeate one
another and by their blending produce Mixture.
But this is a more absurd view than any of the 
foregoing; for such a mixture is impossible. Thus, for
example, if a cup of hemlock juice were blended with
ten cups of water, it will be said that the hemlock is
mixed in with all the water; for certainly if one were
to take even the least portion of the mixture he would
find it full of the potency of the hemlock.

Yet if the hemlock is blended in with every particle of the water
and is distributed as a whole over the whole volume
of the water and through the mutual interpenetration
of both their substances and their qualities, so that
Mixture may in this way result; and if the things so
distributed over each other in every particle occupy
an equal space, so that they are equal to each other,—
then the cup of hemlock will be equal to the ten cups
of water, so that the blend must consist of twenty
cups or of only two, according to the assumption now
made as to the mode of Mixture. And if, again, a
cup of water were poured into the twenty cups,
then—according to the theory assumed—the quantity
is bound to be forty cups or, again, only two, since it
is admissible to conceive either the one cup as all
the twenty over which it is distributed, or the twenty
cups as the one with which they are equalized.

And by thus pouring in a cup at a time and pursuing the
same argument it is possible to infer that the twenty
cups seen in the blend must be twenty thousand and
more, according to the theory of Mixture assumed,
and at the same time only two—a conclusion which
reaches the very height of incongruity. Wherefore
this theory of Mixture also is absurd.

But if Mixture cannot come about by the mutual 
blending either of the substances alone or of the
qualities alone or of both or of neither, and it is
impossible to conceive any other ways than these,
then the process of Mixture and of blending in
general is inconceivable. Hence, if the so-called
Elements are unable to form the compounds either
by way of contact through juxtaposition or by
mixture or blending, then, so far as this argument
goes, the physical theory of the Dogmatists is 
inconceivable.

In addition to the foregoing we might have dwelt 
on the argument about the kinds of motion, since
this also might be held to render the physical theory
of the Dogmatists impossible. For the formation of
the compounds must certainly be due to some motion
both of the elements and of the efficient Principle.
If, then, we shall show that no one kind of motion is
generally agreed upon, it will be clear that, even if
all the assumptions mentioned above be granted, the
Dogmatists have elaborated their so-called ‟Physical
Doctrine” in vain.

Now those who are reputed to have given the most 
complete classification of Motion assert that six kinds
of it exist—local transition, physical change, increase,
decrease, becoming, perishing. We, then, shall deal
with each of the aforesaid kinds of motion separately
beginning with local transition. According, then, to
the Dogmatists, this is the motion by which the moving
object passes on from place to place, either wholly
or partially—wholly as in the case of men walking,
partially as when a globe is moving round a central
axis, for while as a whole it remains in the same place,
its parts change their places.

The main views held about motion are, I imagine, 
three. It is assumed by ordinary people and by
some philosophers that motion exists, but by 
Parmenides, Melissus and certain others that it does
not exist; while the Sceptics have declared that it is
‟no more” existent than non-existent; for so far as
the evidence of phenomena goes it seems that motion
exists, whereas to judge by the philosophic argument
it would seem not to exist. So when we have 
exposed the contradiction which lies between those
who believe in the existence of motion and those who
maintain that motion is naught, if we shall find the
counter-arguments of equal weight, we shall be
compelled to declare that, so far as these arguments
go, motion is ‟no more” existent than non-existent.

We shall begin with those who affirm its real 
existence. 
 These base their view mainly on ‟evidence.” If,
say they, motion does not exist, how does the sun
move from east to west, and how does it produce the
seasons of the year, which are brought about by its
approximations to us and its recessions from us? Or
how do ships put out from harbours and cast anchor
in other harbours very far distant from the first?, And
in what fashion does the denier of motion proceed
from his house and return to it again? These facts
are perfectly incontestable. Consequently, when one
of the Cynics had an argument against motion put
to him, he made no reply but stood up and began
to walk, thus demonstrating by his action and by
‟evidence” that motion is capable of real existence. 
 So these men attempt in this way to put to shame
those who hold the contrary opinion;

but those who deny the existence of motion allege such arguments
as these: If a thing is moved, it is moved either
by itself or by another thing. But if it is moved by
another, it will be moved either causelessly or owing
to some cause. Nothing, they assert, is moved
causelessly; but if it is moved owing to some cause,
the cause owing to which it moves will be what
makes it move, and thus we are involved in an
infinite regress, according to the criticism stated a
little while ago.

Moreover, if the movent thing 
is active, and what is active is moved, that movent
thing will need another movent thing, and the
second a third, and so on ad infinitum, so that the
motion comes to have no beginning; which is absurd.
Therefore the thing that moves is not always moved
by another. Nor yet by itself. Since every movent
causes motion either by pushing forward or by drawing 
after or by pushing up or by thrusting down, what
is self-movent must move itself in one of the aforesaid
ways.

But if it moves itself propulsively, it will be 
behind itself; and if by pulling after, it will be in
front of itself; and if by pushing up, it will be below
itself; and if by thrusting down, it will be above
itself. But it is impossible for anything to be above
or before or beneath or behind its own self; therefore
it is impossible for anything to be moved by itself.
But if nothing is moved either by itself or by another,
then nothing is moved at all.

And if anyone should seek refuge in the notions 
of ‟impulse” and ‟purpose” we must remind him of
the controversy about ‟what is in our power,” and
how it is still unsettled, since hitherto we have failed
to find a criterion of truth.

Further, there is this also to be said. If a thing 
moves, it moves either in the place where it is or in
that where it is not. But it does not move in the
place where it is, for if it is in it, it remains in it;
nor yet does it move in the place where it is not;
for where a thing is not, there it can neither effect
nor suffer anything. Therefore nothing moves. This
argument is, in fact, that of Diodorus Cronos, but it
has been the subject of many attacks, of which we
shall describe, owing to the character of our treatise,
only the more formidable, together with a judgement
of their value, as it seems to us.

Some, then, assert that a thing can move in
the place where it is; at any rate the globes which
revolve round their axes move while remaining in the
same place. Against these men we should transfer
the argument which applies to each of the parts of the
globe, and, reminding them that, to judge by this
argument, it does not move even in respect of its
parts, draw the conclusion that nothing moves in the
place where it is.

And we shall take the same course
in replying to those who declare that the moving
thing occupies two places, that wherein it is and that
whereto it shifts. For we shall ask them when the
moving object shifts from the place wherein it is to
the other place—whether while it is in the first place
or while it is in the second. But when it is in the first
place it does not pass over into the second, for it is
still in the first; and when it is not in this, it is not
passing from it.

And besides, the question is being begged; for where it is not, 
there it cannot be active.For surely no one will allow that 
any object to which he does not grant motion at all can shift to any place.

Some, however, make this statement: Place is
used in two senses, the broad sense, as for example
‟my house,” and the exact sense, as for instance
‟the air which enfolds the surface of my body.” So
the moving object is said to move in place, ‟place”
being used not in the exact sense but in the
broad sense. To these we can reply by dividing up
‟place” in the broad sense, and saying that in one
part of it the body said to be moved properly exists,
this being its own ‟place” in the exact sense, and in
the other part it does not exist, this being the remaining
portions of ‟place” in the extended sense; next
we shall argue that an object can move neither in
the place where it is nor in that where it is not, and
so conclude that nothing can move even in what is
perversely termed ‟place” in the broad sense; for
this is composed of the place wherein it is in the exact
sense and the place wherein it is not, and it has been
proved that a thing cannot move in either of these.

We should also propound the following argument. 
If a thing moves it moves either by way of orderly,
or gradual, progression or by occupying the divisible
interval all at once; but in neither of these ways can
a thing move, as we shall prove; so that it does not
move at all. 
 Now that a thing can not move in orderly progression 
is plain on the face of it. For if bodies, and also
the places and the times in which the bodies are said
to move, are divided to infinity, motion will not occur,
it being impossible to discover amongst the infinite
any first thing wherefrom the object said to move will
derive its initial movement.

And if the aforesaid objects are reducible to atomic parts, and each of the
moving things passes equally in an atomic period of
time with its own first atom into the first atomic point
of space, then all moving things are of equal velocity
—the speediest horse, for instance, and the tortoise; 
which is a result even more absurd than the former.
Therefore motion does not take place by way of
orderly progression. 
 Nor yet by way of immediate occupation of the divisible interval.

For if one ought, as they declare,
to take the apparent as evidence for the non-apparent,
since, in order to complete the distance of a stade
a man must first complete the first portion of the
stade, and secondly the second portion, and so on with
the rest, so likewise everything that moves ought to
move by way of orderly progression; for surely if we
should assert that the moving thing passes all at once
through all the portions of the place wherein it is
said to move, it will be in all the portions thereof at
once, and if one portion of the place through which it
has its motion should be cold, another hot, or, mayhap,
one black, another white, so as to be able also to
colour things in contact,—then the moving thing will
be at once hot and cold and black and white, which is
absurd.

Next let them tell us how much space the
moving thing passes through all at once. For if they
shall assert that it is limitless, they will be granting
that a thing moves through the whole of the earth all
at once; while if they shirk this conclusion, let them
define for us the extent of the space. But, on the one
hand, the attempt to define precisely the space or
interval beyond which the thing moving all at once
will be unable to advance so much as a hair’s-breadth
is probably not merely presumptuous and rash or even
ridiculous, but plunges us again into the original
difficulty; for all things will be of equal velocity,
if each of them alike has its transitional movements
over definite intervals of space.

And if, on the other go hand, they shall assert that the moving thing moves
all at once through a space that is small but not
precisely determined, it will be open to us to adopt
the sorites argument and keep constantly adding a
hair’s-breadth of space to the breadth assumed. And
if, then, they shall make a halt anywhere while we
are pursuing this argument, they will be reverting to
the monstrous theory of precise definition as before;
while if they shall assent to the process of addition,
we shall force them to grant that a thing can move
all at once through the whole of the earth. 
Consequently, objects said to be in motion do not move
by occupying a divisible interval all at once.

But if a thing moves neither thus instantaneously nor by
way of gradual progression, it does not move at all. 
 These, and yet more than these, are the arguments
used by those who reject transient motion. But we,
being unable to refute either these arguments or the
apparent facts on which the view of the reality of
motion is based, suspend our judgement—in view
of the contradiction between appearances and 
arguments—regarding the question as to the existence
or non-existence of motion.

Employing the same reasoning we suspend judgement 
also concerning both increase and decrease.
For the outward evidence seems to support their
reality, which the arguments seem to refute. For
just consider: That which increases must grow in
size as a stable substance, so that it will be false
for anyone to say that one thing increases when an
addition is made to another. Since then substance is
never stable but always in flux, one part supplanting
another, the thing said to have increased does not
retain its former substance together with the added
substance but has its substance all different.

Just as if, for example, when there is a beam three cubits
long a man should bring another of ten cubits and
declare that the beam of three cubits had increased, he
would be lying because the one is wholly different from
the other; so too in the case of every object which is
said to increase, as the former matter flows away and
fresh matter enters in its place, if what is said to be
added is added, one should not call such a condition
increase but complete alteration.

The same argument applies also to decrease. For 
how could that which has no stable existence be said
to have decreased? Besides, if decrease takes place
by way of subtraction, and increase by addition, and
neither subtraction nor addition is anything, then
neither decrease nor increase is anything.

That subtraction is nothing they argue thus: If 
anything is subtracted from anything, either equal
is subtracted from equal, or greater from less, or
less from greater. But in none of these ways does
subtraction take place, as we shall show; therefore
subtraction is impossible. 
 That subtraction takes place in none of these ways
is plain from what follows: What is subtracted from
anything ought, before its subtraction, to be included 
in that from which it is subtracted.

But the equal is not included in the equal—six, for instance,
in six; for what includes must be greater than what
is included, and that from which the subtraction is
made than what is subtracted, in order that there
may be some remainder after the subtraction; for
it is this which is held to distinguish subtraction
from complete removal. Nor is the greater included
in the less—six, for instance, in five; for that is
irrational.

And for this reason, neither is the less 
included in the greater. For if five is included in six,
as less in greater, four will be included in five, three
in four, two in three, and one in two. Therefore six
will contain five, four, three, two, and one, which
when put together form the number fifteen, and
this we conclude is included in six, if it be granted
that the less is included in the greater. So likewise
in the fifteen which is included in the six there is
included the number thirty-five, and so on, step by
step, to infinity. But it is absurd to say that infinite
numbers are included in the number six; and so it is
also absurd to say that less is included in greater.

If, then, what is subtracted from a thing must be 
included in that from which it is to be subtracted,
and neither equal is included in equal, nor greater
in less, nor less in greater, then nothing is subtracted
from anything. 
 Again, if anything is subtracted from anything, it
is either a whole subtracted from a whole, or a part
from a part, or a whole from a part, or a part from
a whole.

But to say that a whole is subtracted 
from either a whole or a part is plainly nonsense. It
remains, then, to say that a part is subtracted either
from a whole or from a part; which is absurd. Thus
for example—basing our argument on numbers for
the sake of clearness—let us take ten and suppose
that from it one is subtracted. This one, then, cannot
be subtracted either from the whole ten or from the
remaining part of the ten, as I shall show; therefore
it is not subtracted at all.

For if the one is subtracted from the whole ten,
since the ten is neither something other than the
ten ones nor one of the ones, but the aggregate of
the ones, the one ought to be subtracted from each
of the ones in order to be subtracted from the whole
ten. Now from a one, above all, nothing can be
subtracted; for the ones are indivisible, and on this
account the one will not be subtracted from the ten
in this way.

And even were we to grant that the
one is subtracted from each of the ones, the one will
contain ten parts, and as containing ten parts it will
beaten. And further, since ten other parts remain,
after the subtraction of the ten parts of the so-called
one, the ten will be twenty. But it is absurd to say
that the one is ten and the ten twenty, and to divide
what, according to them, is indivisible. Wherefore
it is absurd to say that the one is subtracted from the
whole ten.

Neither is the one subtracted from the remaining 
nine; for that from which anything is subtracted
does not remain entire, but the nine does remain
entire after the subtraction of that one. Besides,
since the nine is nothing more than the nine ones, if
it should be said that the one is subtracted from the
whole nine, the sum subtracted will be nine, or if
from a part of it, then in case it be eight the same
absurd results will follow, while if the subtraction is
made from the last one, they will be affirming the
divisibility of the one, which is absurd.

So then, neither from the nine is the one subtracted. But if
it is neither subtracted from the whole ten nor from
a part of it, no part can be subtracted from either a
whole or a part. If, then, nothing is subtracted either
as whole from whole or as part from whole, nor as
whole from part or as part from part, then nothing
is subtracted from anything.

Moreover, addition is regarded by them as one of 
the impossibles. For, they say, that which is added
is added either to itself or to what pre-exists or to
the compound of both; but none of these alternatives
is sound; therefore nothing is added to anything.
Suppose, for instance, a measure of four cups, and
add to this a cup. To what, I ask, is it added? for
it cannot be added to itself, since what is added must
be other than that whereto it is added, but nothing
is other than itself.

Neither is it added to the compound
of the four cups and the one cup; for how
could anything be added to what does not yet exist?
Besides, if the added cup is blended with the four
cups and the one cup, six cups will be the measure
resulting from the four cups and the one cup and
the added cup.

And if the, cup is added to the four 
cups alone, since that which is extended over 
anything is equal to that over which it extends, the cup
which extends over the measure of four cups will
double the four cups so that the whole measure
becomes eight cups—a result contrary to experience.
If, then, what is said to be added is neither added to
itself nor to what pre-exists nor to the compound of
these, and besides these there are no other 
alternatives, then there is no addition of anything to
anything.

Together with the existence of addition and subtraction
and local motion transposition also is
abolished, for this is subtraction from a thing and
addition to a thing by way of transition.

So too with both whole and part. For the whole 
is held to come about by the combination and addition
of the parts, and to cease from being a whole by the
subtraction of one or more parts. Besides, if a whole
exists, it is either other than its parts or its parts
themselves form the whole.

Now it is apparent that the whole is nothing other than its parts; for certainly
when the parts are removed there is nothing left, so
as to enable us to account the whole as something else
besides its parts. But if the parts themselves form
the whole, the whole will be merely a name and an
empty title, and it will have no individual existence,
just as separation also is nothing apart from the
things separated, or laying beams apart from the
beams laid. Therefore no whole exists.

Nor yet parts. For if parts exist, either they are 
parts of the whole, or of one another, or each one of
itself. But they are not parts of the whole, since it
is nothing else than its parts (and besides, the parts
will on this assumption be parts of themselves, since
each of the parts is said to be complementary to the
whole); nor yet of one another, since the part is said
to be included in that whereof it is part, and it is
absurd to assert that, say, the hand is included in
the foot.

Neither will each be a part of itself; for, 
because of the inclusion, it will be both greater and
less than itself. If, then, the so-called parts are parts
neither of the whole nor of themselves nor of one
another, they are parts of nothing. But if they are
parts of nothing, parts have no existence; for co-
relatives are annulled together. 
 Let thus much be said, then, of a general character,
by way of digression, seeing that once already we
have dealt with the subject of whole and part.

Some, too, maintain that what is called ‟physical
change” is non-real, and the arguments they employ
are such as these: If a thing changes, what changes
is either corporeal or incorporeal; but each of these
is matter of dispute; therefore the theory of change
will also be disputable.

If a thing changes, it changes through certain actions of a Cause and by being
acted upon. But it does not change by being acted
upon, for the reality of Cause is refuted, and therewith
is refuted also the object which is acted upon, as
it has no agent to act upon it.

Therefore nothing changes at all. If a thing changes, either what is
changes or what is not. Now what is not is unreal
and can neither act nor be acted upon at all, so that
it does not admit of change either. And if what is
changes, it changes either in so far as it is in being or
in so far as it is not in being.

Now in so far as it is not in being it does not change, for it is not even
existent; while if it changes in so far as it is existent,
it will be other than existent, which means that it
will be non-existent. But it is absurd to say that the
existent becomes non-existent; therefore the existent
does not change either. And if neither the existent
nor the non-existent changes, and besides these there
is nothing else, it only remains to say that nothing
changes.

Some also argue thus: That which changes must
change in a certain time; but nothing changes either
in the past or in the future, nor yet in the present, as
we shall prove; nothing therefore changes. Nothing 
changes in the past or in the future, for neither
of these times is present, and it is impossible to do
or suffer anything in time that is not existent and
present. Nor yet in time present.

For the present time is probably also unreal, and—even if we set
aside this point—it is indivisible; and it is impossible
to suppose that in an indivisible moment of
time iron, say, changes from hard to soft, or any one
of all the other changes takes place; for they appear
to require extension in time. If, then, nothing
changes either in the past or in the future or in the
present, we must declare that nothing changes at all.

Further, if change exists at all it is either sensible 
or intelligible; but it is not sensible, since the senses 
are specialized, whereas change is thought to possess
‟concurrent recollection” both of that from which
it changes and that into which it is said to change.
And if it is intelligible, then, since (as we have
frequently pointed out already ) there exists among
the ancients an unsettled controversy as to the reality
of intelligibles, we shall also be unable to make any
assertion about the reality of change.

Both becoming and perishing are included in the
refutation of addition and subtraction and physical
change; for apart from these nothing would become
or perish. Thus, for instance, it is as a result of
the perishing of the ten, as they say, that the nine
becomes by the subtraction of one, and the ten from
the perishing of the nine by the addition of one;
and rust becomes from the perishing of bronze by
means of change. Hence, if the aforesaid motions
are abolished it is likely that becoming and perishing
are also necessarily abolished.

Yet none the less some argue also as follows: 
If Socrates was born, Socrates became either when
Socrates existed not or when Socrates already existed;
but if he shall be said to have become when he already
existed, he will have become twice; and if when he
did not exist, Socrates was both existent and non-
existent at the same time—existent through having
become, non-existent by hypothesis.

And if Socrates died, he died either when he lived or when he died.
Now he did not die when he lived, since he would
have been at once both alive and dead; nor yet
when he died, since he would have been dead twice.
Therefore Socrates did not die. And by applying
this argument in turn to each of the things said to
become or perish it is possible to abolish becoming
and perishing.

Some also argue thus: If a thing becomes,
either the existent becomes or the non-existent.
But the non-existent does not become; for to the
non-existent nothing can occur; neither, therefore,
can becoming occur. Nor does the existent become.
For if the existent becomes, it becomes either in so
far as it is existent or in so far as it is non-existent.
Now in so far as it is non-existent it does not become.
But if it becomes in so far as it is existent, then, since
they assert that what becomes becomes other from
other, what becomes will be other than the existent,
and that is non-existent. Therefore what becomes
will be non-existent, which is nonsense.

If, then, neither the non-existent becomes nor the existent,
nothing becomes at all. 
 For the same reasons, neither does anything
perish. For if anything perishes, it is either the
existent that perishes or the non-existent. Now the
non-existent does not perish, for what perishes must
be a subject of action. Nor yet does the existent
perish. For it must perish either while continuing in
existence or while not so continuing. And if it be
while continuing in existence, it will be at one and the
same time both existent and non-existent;

for since it does not perish in so far as it is non-existent but
in so far as it is existent, it will be other than the
existent and therefore non-existent in so far as it is
said to have perished, whereas in so far as it is said to
perish while continuing in existence it will be existent.
But it is absurd to say that the same thing is both
existent and non-existent; therefore the existent does
not perish while continuing in existence. And if the
existent does not perish while continuing in existence
but passes first into non-existence and then in this
way perishes, it is no longer the existent that perishes
but the non-existent; and this we have shown to be
impossible. If, then, neither the existent perishes nor
the non-existent, and besides these there is nothing
else, nothing perishes at all. 
 This account of the motions will suffice by way
of outline, and therefrom it follows that the Physical
Science of the Dogmatists is unreal and inconceivable.

In like manner some have doubted about physical
rest, say ing that what is in motion is not at rest, but
every body i is constantly in motion according to the
views of the Dogmatists who assert that Being is in
flux and always undergoing effluxes and additions—
just as Plato does not even speak of bodies as ‟being”
but rather calls them ‟becoming,” and Heracleitus
compares the mobility of our matter to the swift
current of a river. Therefore no body is at rest.

What is said to be at rest is, in fact, held to be embraced
by the things which surround it, and what is embraced
is acted upon; but nothing acted upon exists, since
no causal activity exists, as we have shown; therefore
nothing is at rest. 
 Some, too, propound this argument: What is at
rest is acted upon; but what is acted upon is in
motion; therefore what is said to be at rest is in
motion; but if it is in motion, it is not at rest.

And from this it is evident that neither does the incorporeal
admit of being at rest. For if what is at rest is acted
upon, and being acted upon is a property, if anything,
of bodies and not of incorporeals, no incorporeal
can either be acted upon or be at rest; therefore
nothing is at rest.

So much for the subject of rest. And since no one
of the things we have mentioned is conceived apart
from space or time, we must pass on to consider these;
for if one should prove these to be unreal, then,
because of them, each of the others also will be 
unreal. Let us begin with space.

Space, or place, then, is used in two senses, the
strict and the loose—loosely of place taken broadly
(as ‟my city”), and strictly of exactly containing
place whereby we are exactly enclosed. Our inquiry,
then, is concerned with space of the strict kind. This
some have affirmed, others denied; and others have
suspended judgement about it.

And of these, those who maintain its existence have recourse to the
evidence of experience. Who, they argue, could
assert that space does not exist when he sees the parts
of space, such as right and left, up and down, before
and behind; and when he is now here, now there,
and sees that where my teacher was talking there
I am talking now; and when he observes that the
place of things naturally light is different from that of
things naturally heavy;

and when, also, he hears the
ancients declaring that ‟Verily first of all came Chaos
into existence” For space, they say, is called Chaos
from its capacity for containing what becomes within
it. Then, too, if any body exists, space also exists;
for without it body would not exist. And if ‟that-by-
which” exists, and ‟that-from-which,” there exists;
also ‟that-in-which,” and this is space; but the first
is in each of the two, therefore the second is in both.

But those who deny space do not admit the existence
of the parts of space; for space, they say, is nothing
else than its parts, and he who tries to deduce the
existence of space from the assumption that its parts
exist is seeking to establish the matter in question by
means of itself. Equally silly is the language of those
who assert that a thing becomes or has become in
some place, when space in general is not admitted 
And they also presume the reality of body, which
is not self-evident; and, in much the same way as
space, both that-from-which and that-by-which are
proved to be unreal.

Hesiod, too, is no competent judge of philosophical problems. And while thus
rebutting the arguments that tend to establish the
existence of space, they also demonstrate its unreality
more elaborately by making use of what are held to
be the most weighty views of the Dogmatists about
space, namely those of the Stoics and Peripatetics, in
the following fashion.

The Stoics declare that Void is that which is capable
of being occupied by an existent but is not so occupied,
or an interval empty of body, or an interval un-
occupied by body; and that Place is an interval
occupied by an existent and equated to that which
occupies it (‟existent” being here the name they
give to ‟body”); and that Room is an interval partly
occupied by body and partly unoccupied—though
some of them say that Room is the Place of the large
body, so that the difference between Place and Room
depends on size.

Their opponents then argue thus:
When the Stoics define Place as an ‟interval occupied
by body,” in what sense do they call it an ‟interval?”
Do they mean the length of the body or its width or
its depth only, or all three dimensions? For if they
mean one dimension, the place is not equated with
the object of which it is the place, and besides, that
which includes is part of what is included, which is
pure nonsense.

And if by ‟interval” is meant the
three dimensions, then, since in the so-called place
there subsists neither a void nor another body which
has dimensions, but only the body said to exist in
place, and it is composed of the dimensions (for it is
length and breadth and depth and solidity, this last
being said to be a property of the foregoing dimensions),
the body itself will be its own place and at
once both container and contained, which is absurd.

Therefore no dimension of a subsisting place exists.
And, consequently, place is nothing. 
 This argument also is propounded. Since the
dimensions are not found to be twofold in the case of
each of the objects said to exist in place, but there
is one length, one breadth and one depth, do these
dimensions belong to the body only, or to the place
only, or to both? If they belong only to the place,
the body will have no length or breadth or depth of
its own, so that the body will not even be body, which
is absurd.

If they belong to both, then, since the
Void has no reality apart from the dimensions, if the
dimensions of the Void subsist in the body and serve
to compose the body itself, the components of the
Void will also be components of the body—for about
the reality of solidity it is impossible to say anything
positive, as we have shown above. And since in
the case of the so-called body only those dimensions
appear which belong to the Void and are identical
with the Void, the body will be Void, which is absurd.
And if the dimensions belong to the body only, there
will be no dimension of place, and therefore no place
either. If, then, no dimension of place is found in
any of the ways described above, place does not exist.

Further, it is argued that when the body occupies
the Void and place comes about, the Void either
remains or withdraws or perishes. But if it remains,
the Plenum and the Void will be identical; and if it
withdraws by a movement of transition, or perishes
by change, the Void will be a body; for these 
affections are peculiar to body. But it is absurd to say
either that Void and Plenum are identical or that the
Void is body. Therefore it is absurd to say that the
Void can be occupied by body and become place.

For these reasons also the Void is found to be unreal,
since it is impossible for it to be occupied by body and
to become place; for Void was defined as ‟that
which is capable of being occupied by body.” And,
in the refutation of these, Room also is involved; for
it is annulled along with place if ‟room is the large
place,” while if it is ‟that which is partly occupied
by body and partly empty extension,” its refutation
is included in that of these two. 
 These arguments, and others besides, are directed
against the views about place held by the Stoics.

The Peripatetics assert that place is ‟the limit of
what encloses in so far as it encloses,” so that my
place is the surface of the air that forms a mould
round my body. But if this is place, the same thing
will both be and not be. For when the body is about to
become in a certain place, then, inasmuch as nothing
can become in what is non-existent, the place must
be pre-existent in order that the body may in this
way become in it, and consequently the place will
exist before the-body-in-the-place becomes therein.
But inasmuch as it consists in the moulding of the
surface of what encloses round the thing enclosed,
place cannot be already subsisting before the body
becomes within it, and therefore it will not be in
existence then. But it is absurd to say that the same
thing both is and is not; therefore place is not ‟the
limit of what encloses in so far as it encloses.”

Furthermore, if place is anything, it is either created
or uncreate.Now it is not uncreate; for it is brought
about, they say, by being moulded round the body
within it. Nor yet is it created; for if it is created,
it is either when the body is in place that the place,
in which the body in place is already said to be,
comes into existence, or when the body is not in it.

But it does not come into existence either when the
body is in it (for the place of the body within it exists
already), or when it is not in it, since, as they assert,
the container is moulded round the contained and in
this way place becomes, and nothing can be moulded
round that which is not within it. But if place does
not become either when the body is in place or when
it is not therein, and no other alternatives are
conceivable, then place is not created at all. And if it
is neither created nor uncreate, it has no existence.

These objections may also be stated more generally. 
If place is anything, it is either corporeal or incorporeal;
but each of these alternatives is, as we have
shown, disputed; therefore place is in dispute. Place
is conceived in relation to the body whereof it is the
place; but the doctrine of the reality of body is
disputed, therefore that of place is likewise disputable.
The place of each thing is not eternal, but if we say
that it becomes it is found to be unreal as becoming
does not exist.

It is possible to adduce many other arguments.
But in order to avoid prolonging our exposition, we
may conclude by saying that while the Sceptics are
put to confusion by the arguments, they are also put
to shame by the evidence of experience. Consequently
we attach ourselves to neither side, so
far as concerns the doctrines of the Dogmatists, but
suspend judgement regarding place.

Our attitude is the same with respect to the inquiry
about time. For if we depend on appearances, time
seems to be something, but if we depend on the
arguments about it, it appears unreal. Some define
time as ‟the interval of the motion of the Whole”
(meaning by ‟Whole” the Universe), others as
‟the actual motion of the Universe;” Aristotle (or,
as some say, Plato) as ‟the number of the prior
and posterior in motion;”

Strato (or, as some say, Aristotle) as ‟the measure of motion and rest;”
Epicurus (according to Demetrius the Laconian ) as
‟a concurrence of concurrences, concomitant with
days and nights and seasons and affections and non-affections and motions and rests.”

And, in point of substance, some have affirmed that it is corporeal
—for instance, Aenesidemus, arguing that it differs
in nothing from Being and the prime body,—others, 
that it is incorporeal. Either, then, all these theories
are true, or all false, or some true and some false;
but they cannot all be true (most of them being
in conflict), nor will it be granted by the Dogmatists 
that all are false.

And besides, should it
be granted that the assertion of the corporeality
of time is false, and that of its incorporeality likewise 
false, then, ipso facto, the unreality of time will
be granted; for it cannot be anything but one or
other of these. Nor yet can we apprehend which
theories are true, which false, owing to the equal
weight of the rival opinions as well as the perplexity
regarding the criterion and proof.

Hence for these reasons we shall be unable to affirm anything positively 
about time. 
 Further, since time does not seem to subsist without
motion or even rest, if motion is abolished, and
likewise rest, time is abolished. None the less the
following objections against time are made by some.
If time exists, it is either limited or unlimited.

But if it is limited, it began at a certain time and will end
at a certain time. Consequently, there was once a
time when time was not (before it began), and there
will once be a time when time will not be (after it has
ended); which is absurd. So then time is not limited.

But if it is unlimited, since part of it is said to be
past, part present, and part future, the future and
past are either existent or non-existent. But if they
are non-existent, and there remains only the present,
which is momentary, time will be limited and the
original difficulties will follow. And if the past
exists and the future exists, each of these will be
present. But it is absurd to call past and future
time present; neither, then, is time unlimited. But
if it is neither unlimited nor limited, time does not
exist at all.

Further, if time exists it is either divisible or 
indivisible. Now it is not indivisible; for it is divided,
as they themselves declare, into present, past, and
future. Yet it is not divisible either. For each
divisible thing is measured by some part of itself, the
measure coinciding with each part of the measured,
as when we measure a cubit by a finger. But time
cannot be measured by any part of itself. If, for
instance, the present measures the past, it will
coincide with the past and will therefore be past,
and similarly it will be future in the case of the
future. And if the future should measure the rest,
it will be present and past, and so likewise the past
will be future and present; which is nonsense.
Neither, then, is time divisible. But if it is neither
indivisible nor divisible, it does not exist.

Time, too, is said to be tripartite, partly past, partly 
present, and partly future. Of these the past and
the future are non-existent; for if past and future
time exist now, each of them will be present. Neither
is the present existent; for if present time exists
it is either indivisible or divisible. Now it is not
indivisible; for what changes is said to change in
the present time, but nothing changes in indivisible
time —iron, for instance, into softness, and so on.
Hence present time is not indivisible.

Neither is it divisible; for it could not be divided into a
plurality of presents, since time present is said to
change into time past imperceptibly owing to the
rapid flux of the things in the Universe. Nor yet into
past and future; for so it will be unreal, having one
part of itself no longer existent and the other part
not yet existent.

Hence, too, the present cannot be 
the end of the past and the beginning of the future,
since then it will both be and not be existent; for it
will exist as present, but will not exist because its
parts are non-existent. Therefore it is not divisible
either. But if the present is neither indivisible nor
divisible, it does not exist. And when neither the
present nor the past nor the future exists, time too is
non-existent; for what is compounded of things unreal
is unreal.

This argument, too, is alleged against time: If 
time exists it is either generable and perishable or
ingenerable and imperishable. Now it is not 
ingenerable and imperishable, since part of it is said
to be past and no longer in existence, and part to be
future and not yet in existence. Neither is it generable
and perishable.

For things generated must be generated from something existent, and things which
perish must perish into something existent, according
to the postulates of the Dogmatists themselves. If,
then, time perishes into the past, it perishes into a
non-existent; and if it is generated out of the future,
it is generated out of a non-existent; for neither of
these is in existence. But it is absurd to say that
anything is generated from a non-existent or perishes
into the non-existent. Therefore time is not generable
and perishable. But if it is neither ingenerable
and imperishable nor generable and perishable, it does
not exist at all.

Further, since everything which becomes seems to
become in time, time, if it becomes, becomes in time.
Either, then, it becomes itself in itself or as one time
in another. But if it becomes in itself, it will be at
once both existent and non-existent. For since that
within which a thing becomes must exist before the
thing which becomes within it, the time which becomes
in itself does not yet exist in so far as it becomes,
but does already exist in so far as it becomes in itself. 
Consequently it does not become in itself.

Nor yet in another. For if the present becomes in the future,
the present will be future, and if in the past, it will
be past. And the same may be said of all the other
times; so that one time does not become in another.
But if time neither becomes in itself nor as one time
in another it is not generable. And it has been shown
that it is not ingenerable either. Being, then, neither
generable nor ingenerable, it is wholly non-existent;
for each existing thing is bound to be either generable
or ingenerable.

Since time, it seems, is not found apart from 
number, it will not be out of place to discuss number
briefly. In the customary way we speak undogmatically 
of numbering a thing and hear number
talked of as something which exists; but the extreme
methods of the Dogmatists have provoked the attack
upon number also.

Thus, for example, the School of 
Pythagoras declare that numbers are also elements
of the Universe. They assert, in fact, that phenomena
are constructed from something, and that the
elements must be simple; therefore the elements
are non-evident. But of things non-evident, some are
corporeal, like atoms and masses, others incorporeal,
like figures and forms and numbers. Of these
the corporeal are composite, being constructed from
length and breadth and depth and solidity, or even
weight. The elements, therefore, are not only non-
evident but also incorporeal.

Moreover, each of the incorporeals involves the perception of number, for
it is either one or two or more. Thus it is inferred
that the non-evident and incorporeal numbers which
are involved in all perception are the elements of
existing things. Yet not simply these numbers ,
but both the Monad also and the Indefinite Dyad
which is generated by the expansion of the Monad,
and by participation in which the particular dyads
become dyads.

For they say that it is from these 
that the rest of the numbers are generated—those,
that is, which are involved in the perception of
numerables—and the Universe is arranged. For the
point presents the relation, or character, of the
Monad, and the line that of the Dyad (it being
regarded as lying between two points), and the
surface that of the Triad (for they describe it as a
flowing of the line breadth-wise up to another point
placed transversely), and the solid body that of the
Tetrad; for Body is formed by an ascension of the
surface up to a point placed above.

It is in this way that they image forth both the bodies and the whole
Universe, which also they declare to be arranged
according to harmonic ratios —namely, that of the
‟By-Fours,” which is ‟epitrite,” as is the ratio of
8 to 6; and that of the “ By-Fives,” which is one
and a half times, as is the ratio of 9 to 6; and that
of the ‟By-Alls,” which is double, as is the ratio of
12 to 6.

These are the fictions they imagine; and they 
also make out that number is something else apart
from numerables, arguing that if ‟animal” according
to its proper definition is (say) one, the plant, since
it is not an animal, will not be one; but the plant is
one; therefore the animal is not one qua animal but
in virtue of some other attribute perceived outside
itself, whereof each animal partakes and because
of which it becomes one. And if number is the
numerables, since the numerables are men (say) and
oxen and horses, number will be men and oxen and
horses—and number will be white and black and
bearded, if the objects counted should happen to be
such.

But these things are absurd; therefore number
is not the numerables, but it has a reality of its own
apart from them whereby it is involved in the perception 
of the numerables and is an element. 
 So when they had thus concluded that number is
not the numerables, there arose in consequence the
difficulty about number. For it is argued that if
number exists, number is either the actual numerables
or something else apart from them; but number is
neither the actual numerables, as the Pythagoreans
have proved, nor something else apart from them,
as we shall show; number, therefore, is nothing.

That number is nothing apart from the numerables
we shall demonstrate by basing our argument on the
Monad, for the sake of lucidity of exposition. If the
Monad, by partaking in which each of its participants
becomes one, is in itself a real object, this Monad
will be either one or as many as are its participants.
But if it is one, does each of the things said to partake
thereof partake of all of it or of a part of it? For
if the one man (say) takes all the Monad, there will
no longer exist a monad for the one horse to partake
of, or the one dog or any one of all the other things
which we declare to be one

—just as, supposing there are a number of naked men, who possess only one
garment amongst them, which one man had put on,
all the rest will remain naked and without a garment.
And if each thing partakes of a part of it, then, in
the first place, the Monad will have a part. and parts,
too, infinite in number into which it is divided; which
is absurd. And further, just as the part of the Decad,
such as the Dyad, is not a Decad, so neither will the
part of the Monad be a Monad, and for this reason
nothing will partake of the Monad. Hence the Monad
whereof the particular objects are said to partake is
not one.

But if the monads, by participation in which each
of the particular objects is called one, are equal
in number to the numerables to which the term
‟one” is applied, the monads partaken of will be
infinite in number. And these either partake of a
superior monad or of monads equal in number to
themselves, or else they do not so partake but are
monads apart from any participation.

Yet if these can be monads without participation, each of the
sensibles also will be able to be one without participation
in a monad, and so at once the monad said to be
perceived as real in itself is overthrown. Whereas, if
those monads are monads by participation, either they
all partake of one monad, or each partakes of a monad
of its own. And if all partake of one, each will be
said to partake either of a part or of the whole, and
the original difficulties will still remain;

but if each partakes of its own monad, we must posit a new
monad for each of those monads, and others again
for the former, and so on ad infinitum. If then, in
order to apprehend that there are certain self-sub-sistent
monads by participation in which each existing
thing is one, it is necessary to apprehend an infinite
infinity of intelligible monads, and to apprehend an
infinite infinity of intelligible monads is a thing
impossible, then it is impossible to show that there are
certain intelligible monads and that each existing
thing is one through becoming one by participation
in its own monad.

It is absurd, therefore, to say that the monads are
as numerous as the things which partake of them.
But if the so-called self-subsistent monad is neither
one nor as many as its participants, a self-subsistent
monad does not exist at all. So likewise none of the
other numbers will be self-subsistent; for one may
apply to all the numbers the argument which has
now been employed in the typical case of the monad.
But if number is neither self-subsistent, as we have
shown, nor consists in the actual numerables, as the
Pythagoreans have demonstrated, and beyond these
there is no other alternative, then we must declare
that number does not exist.

In what way, too, is the Dyad said to be generated
from the Monad by those who believe that number
is something else apart from the numerables? For
when we combine a monad with another monad either
something external is added to the monads, or something
is subtracted from them, or nothing is either
added or subtracted. But if nothing is either added
or subtracted, there will not be a Dyad. For neither
did the monads, when existing apart from each other,
contain the Dyad as involved in the perception of
them, according to their own definition, nor has
any addition now been made to them from without,
just as, by hypothesis, nothing has been subtracted.

Hence the combination of the monad with the monad 
will not be a dyad, as no addition or subtraction
from without takes place. But if subtraction does
take place, not only will there not be a dyad but the
monads will even be diminished. And if the dyad is
added to them from without, so that a dyad may be
generated from the monads, the things which appear
to be two will be four; for there exists already a
monad and a second monad, and when an outside
dyad is added to these the result will be the number
four.

And the same argument applies to all the
other numbers which are said to be formed as a
result of combination. 
 If, then, the numbers which are said to be compounded
from the superior numbers are formed
neither by subtraction nor by addition nor without
subtraction and addition, the formation of the number
which is said to be independent and apart from the
numerables is non-composite. But they themselves
make it clear that the numbers formed by combination
are not ungenerated by asserting that they are 
compounded and generated from the superior numbers
—from the monad, for example, and the Indefinite
Dyad.

So then number does not subsist of itself.
But if number neither is conceived as self-existent,
nor subsists in the numerables, then, to judge from
the subtleties introduced by the Dogmatists, number
is nothing. 
 Let this, then, suffice as an account in outline of
what is called the Physical section of philosophy.

There remains the Ethical division, which is supposed
to deal with the distinguishing of things
good, bad, and indifferent. In order, then, to treat
of this branch also in a summary way, we shall inquire
into the reality of things good, bad, and indifferent,
explaining first the conception of each.

The Stoics, then, assert that good is ‟utility or not
other than utility,” meaning by ‟utility” virtue and
right action, and by ‟not other than utility” the
good man and the friend. For ‟virtue,” as consisting
in a certain state of the ruling principle, and
‟right action,” being an activity in accordance with
virtue, are exactly ‟utility;” while the good man
and the friend are ‟not other than utility.”

For utility is a part of the good man, being his ruling
principle. But the wholes, they say, are not the
same as the parts (for the man is not a hand), nor are
they other than the parts (for without the parts they
do not subsist). Wherefore they assert that the
wholes are not other than the parts. Hence, since
the good man stands in the relation of a whole to his
ruling principle, which they have identified with
utility, they declare that he is not other than utility.

Hence also they assert that good has three meanings. 
In one of its meanings, good, they say, is that
by which utility may be gained, this being the most
principal good and virtue; in another meaning, good
is that of which utility is an accidental result, like
virtue and virtuous actions; and thirdly, it is that
which is capable of being useful; and such is virtue
and virtuous action and the good man and the friend,
and gods and good daemons; so that the second
signification of good is inclusive of the first signification,
and the third of both the second and the first.

But some define good as ‟what is to be chosen for its
own sake;” and others as ‟that which contributes
to happiness or is supplementary thereto;” and
happiness, as the Stoics declare, is ‟the smooth
current of life.” 
 These, or such as these, are their statements with
reference to the notion of the Good.

But in describing as good what is useful or what is choiceworthy
for its own sake or what is contributory to happiness,
one is not exhibiting the essence of the good but
stating one of its properties. And this is senseless.
For the properties aforesaid belong either to the good
only or to other things as well. But if they belong to
other things as well, they are not, when thus extended,
characteristic marks of the good; while if they belong
only to the Good, it is not possible for us to derive
from them a notion of the good.

For just as the man who has no notion of ‟horse” has no knowledge of
what ‟neighing” is and cannot arrive thereby at a
notion of ‟horse,” unless he should first meet with a
neighing horse, so too one who is seeking the essence
of the good, because he has no knowledge of the
good, cannot perceive the attribute which is peculiar
to it alone in order that he may be enabled thereby
to gain a notion of the good itself. For he must first
learn the nature of the good itself, and then pass on
to apprehend that it is useful, and that it is 
choiceworthy for its own sake, and that it is productive
of happiness.

But that the aforesaid attributes are
not sufficient to indicate the concept and the real
nature of the good is made plain by the practice of
the Dogmatists. All, probably, agree that the good is
useful and that it is choiceworthy (so that the good is
said to be, as it were, ‟the delightful” ) and that it
is productive of happiness; but when asked what the
thing is to which these properties belong, they plunge
into a truceless war, some saying it is virtue, others
pleasure, others painlessness, and others something
else. And yet, if the essence of the good had
been proved from the foregoing definitions, they
would not have been at feud as though its nature
were unknown.

Such, then, is the discord amongst those who are
reputed the most eminent of the Dogmatists regarding
the notion of the Good; and they have differed likewise 
regarding Evil, some defining Evil as ‟damage
or not other than damage,” others as ‟what is to be
shunned for its own sake,” others as ‟what is 
productive of unhappiness.” But since they express by
these phrases not the essence of evil but some of its
possible attributes they are involved in the logical
impasse mentioned above.

The term ‟indifferent,” they say, is used in three
senses—in one sense, of that which is an object of
neither inclination nor disinclination, as for instance
the fact that the stars or the hairs of the head are
even in number; in another sense, of that which is an
object of inclination or disinclination, but not towards
this particular object any more than towards that, as
in the case of two indistinguishable tetradrachms,
when one has to choose one of them; for there arises
an inclination to choose one of them, but not this
one more than that one; and a third sense of the term
‟indifferent” is, they say, ‟that which contributes
neither to happiness nor to unhappiness,” as health,
or wealth; for what a man may use now well, now
ill, that, they say, is indifferent, and they claim to
discuss it specially in their Ethics.

But what view we ought to take regarding this conception is plain from
what we have already said about things good and evil. 
 Thus, then, it is plain that they have not guided
us to a clear conception of the several things above-
mentioned; yet, in thus failing with regard to
matters that, perhaps, have no real existence, their
experience is by no means strange. For there
are some who argue on the following grounds
that nothing is by nature either good or evil or
indifferent.

Fire which heats by nature appears to all as heating, 
and snow which chills by nature appears to all as
chilling, and all things which move by nature move
equally all those who are, as they say, in a natural
condition. But none of the so-called ‟goods,” as we
shall show, moves all men as being good; therefore
no natural good exists. And that none of the so-called
goods moves all men alike is, they assert, an evident
fact.

For, not to mention ordinary folk—of whom 
some regard right bodily condition as good, others
chambering, others gluttony, others drunkenness,
others gambling, others greed, and others still worse
things,—some of the philosophers themselves (such as
the Peripatetics) say that there are three kinds of
goods; of these some concern the soul, like the
virtues, others the body, like health and similar
things, while others are external, such as friends,
wealth and the like.

The Stoics themselves, too,
assert that there is a trinity of goods; of these some
have to do with the soul, like the virtues, others are
external, like the good man and the friend, while
others are neither of the soul nor external, as for
instance the good man in relation to himself; but
they deny that the bodily states, which the Peripatetics 
declare to be goods, are goods. And some have
accepted pleasure as a good, whereas some affirm
that it is a downright evil, so that one professor of
philosophy actually exclaimed, ‟I would sooner be
mad than merry.”

If, then, things which move by nature move all 
men alike, while we are not all moved alike by the
so-called goods, there is nothing good by nature. In
fact it is impossible to believe either all the views
now set forth, because of their conflicting character,
or any one of them. For he who asserts that one
must believe this view, but not that, becomes a party
to the controversy, since he has opposed to him the
arguments of those who take the rival view, and
therefore he himself, along with the rest, will need
an adjudicator instead of pronouncing judgement on
others. And as there does not exist any agreed
criterion or proof owing to the unsettled controversy
about these matters, he will be reduced to suspending
judgement, and consequently he will be unable to
affirm positively what the good by nature is.

Further, it is asserted by some that Good is either
the Choice itself or that which we choose. Now Choice
is not good according to its proper meaning; else we
would not have been hurrying to obtain that which
we choose, for fear of losing the power of continuing
to choose it; for example, if the seeking to get drink
were good, we would not have hurried to obtain
drink; for when we have enjoyed it we are quit of
seeking to get it. So, too, with hunger and love and
the rest. Choice, then, is not choiceworthy in itself,
even if it is not actually disagreeable; for in fact the
hungry man hurries to partake of food in order to
get quit of the discomfort due to his hunger; and so
likewise the man in love and the thirsty man.

But neither is the good the choiceworthy. For this
is either external to us or in connexion with us. But
if it is external to us either it produces in us a soothing
motion and a welcome condition and a delightful
feeling, or it does not affect us at all. And if it is not
a delight to us it will not be good, nor will it attract
us to the choosing of it, nor will it be choiceworthy
at all. And if there arises within us, from the external
object, a congenial condition and an agreeable feeling,
it is not for its own sake that the external object will
be choiceworthy but for the sake of the internal 
condition which follows upon it;

so that what is choiceworthy in itself cannot be external. Nor can it be
personal to us. For it is said to belong either to the
body alone or to the soul alone or to both. But if it
belongs to the body alone, it will elude our perception;
for our perceptions are said to be properties of the
soul, and they assert that the body, viewed by itself,
is irrational. And if it should be said to extend to
the soul also, it would seem to be choiceworthy owing
to its affecting the soul and to the agreeable feeling
therein; for, according to them, what is judged to
be choiceworthy is judged by the intellect and not
by the irrational body.

There remains the alternative that the good is in
the soul only. But this, too, is impossible if we go by
the statements of the Dogmatists. For the soul is,
perhaps, actually non-existent; and even if it exists,
judging by what they say it is not apprehended, as
I have argued in my chapter ‟On the Criterion.”
How then could one venture to affirm that something
takes place in a thing which he does not apprehend?

But, to pass over these objections, in what manner
does the good, according to them, come about in the
soul? For certainly, if Epicurus makes the End consist
in pleasure and asserts that the soul, like all else,
is composed of atoms, it is impossible to explain how
in a heap of atoms there can come about pleasure and
assent or judgement that this object is choiceworthy
and good, that object to be avoided and evil.

Again, the Stoics declare that goods of the soul
are certain arts, namely the virtues. And an art,
they say, is ‟a system composed of co-exercised
apprehensions,” and the perceptions arise in
the ruling principle. But how there takes place
in the ruling principle, which according to them
is breath, a deposit of perceptions, and such
an aggregation of them as to produce art, it is
impossible to conceive, when each succeeding 
impression obliterates the previous one, seeing that
breath is fluid and it is said to move as a whole at
each impression.

For it is perfect nonsense to say
that Plato’s imaginary construction of the soul—I
mean the mixture of the indivisible and the divisible
essence and of the nature of the Other and of the
Same, or the Numbers—is capable of being receptive
of the Good. Hence the good cannot belong to the
soul either.

But if the good is not choice itself, and
what is choiceworthy in itself neither exists externally
nor belongs to either body or soul—as I have argued,
—then there does not exist at all any natural good. 
 For the foregoing reasons also there exists no
natural evil. For things which seem to some to be
evil are pursued as goods by others—for instance,
incontinence, injustice, avarice, intemperance, and the
like. Hence, if it is the nature of things naturally
existent to move all men alike, whereas the things
said to be evil do not move all alike, nothing is
naturally evil.

Similarly there is nothing naturally indifferent,
because of the divergence of opinion about things
indifferent. The Stoics, for example, assert that of
the indifferents some are preferred, some rejected,
and others neither preferred nor rejected, —the preferred
being such as have sufficient value, like health
and wealth; the rejected such as have not sufficient
value, like poverty and sickness; while extending
the finger or bending it in are cases of the neither
preferred nor rejected.

Some, however, maintain that none of the indifferents is by nature preferred or
rejected; for, owing to the differences in the circumstances,
each of the indifferents appears at one time
preferred, at another rejected. For certainly, they
argue, if the rich were being threatened with attack
by a tyrant while the poor were being left in peace,
everyone would prefer to be poor rather than rich, so
that wealth would be a thing rejected.

Consequently,since of each of the so-called indifferents some say
that it is good, others bad, whereas all alike would
have counted it indifferent had it been naturally
indifferent, there is nothing that is naturally
indifferent. 
 So also, should anyone declare that courage is
naturally choiceworthy because lions seem to be
naturally bold and courageous, bulls too, it may be,
and some men and cocks, we reply that, as for that,
cowardice also is one of the things naturally choiceworthy,
since deer and hares and many other animals
are naturally impelled thereto. The majority of
men, too, show themselves to be cowardly; for it is
rare for a man to give himself up to death for the sake
of his country, or to seem inspired to do any other
daring deed, the great majority of mankind being
averse to all such actions.

Hence, also, the Epicureans suppose themselves to
have proved that pleasure is naturally choiceworthy;
for the animals, they say, as soon as they are born,
when still unperverted, seek after pleasure and avoid
pains.

But to these we may reply that what is productive
of evil cannot be naturally good; but pleasure
is productive of evils; for to every pleasure there is
linked a pain, and pain, according to them, is a natural
evil. Thus, for example, the drunkard feels pleasure
when filling himself with wine, and the glutton with
food, and the lecher in immoderate sexual intercourse,
yet these things are productive of both poverty and
sickness, which, as they say, are painful and evil.
Pleasure, therefore, is not a natural good.

Similarly, too, what is productive of good is not naturally evil,
and pains bring about pleasures; it is, in fact, by toil
that we acquire knowledge, and it is thus also that
a man becomes possessed both of wealth and of his
lady-love, and pains preserve health. Toil, then, is
not naturally evil. Indeed if pleasure were naturally
good, and toil bad, all men, as we said, would have
been similarly disposed towards them, whereas we
see many of the philosophers choosing toil and 
hardship and despising pleasure.

And so, too, those who assert that the virtuous life
is naturally good might be refuted by the fact that
some of the sages choose the life which includes
pleasure, so that the claim that a thing is by nature
of this sort or that is contradicted by the divergence of
opinion amongst the Dogmatists themselves.

And perhaps it may not be amiss, in addition to
what has been said, to dwell more in detail, though
briefly, on the notions concerning things shameful and
not shameful, unholy and not so, laws and customs,
piety towards the gods, reverence for the departed,
and the like. For thus we shall discover a great
variety of belief concerning what ought or ought not
to be done.

For example, amongst us sodomy is regarded as
shameful or rather illegal, but by the Germani, they
say, it is not looked on as shameful but as a customary
thing. It is said, too, that in Thebes long ago this
practice was not held to be shameful, and they say
that Meriones the Cretan was so called by way of
indicating the Cretans’ custom, and some refer to
this the burning love of Achilles for Patroclus.

And what wonder, when both the adherents of the Cynic
philosophy and the followers of Zeno of Citium,
Cleanthes and Chrysippus, declare that this practice
is indifferent? Having intercourse with a woman,
too, in public, although deemed by us to be shameful,
is not thought to be shameful by some of the Indians;
at any rate they couple publicly with indifference, like
the philosopher Crates, as the story goes.

Moreover, prostitution is with us a shameful and disgraceful
thing, but with many of the Egyptians it is highly
esteemed; at least, they say that those women who
have the greatest number of lovers wear an ornamental
ankle-ring as a token of their proud position. 
And with some of them the girls marry after
collecting a dowry before marriage by means of
prostitution. We see the Stoics also declaring that
it is not amiss to keep company with a prostitute or
to live on the profits of prostitution.

Moreover, with us tattooing is held to be shameful
and degrading, but many of the Egyptians and
Sarmatians tattoo their offspring.

Also, it is a shameful thing with us for men to wear earrings, but
amongst some of the barbarians, like the Syrians, it is
a token of nobility. And some, by way of marking
their nobility still further, pierce the nostrils also of
their children and suspend from them rings of silver
or gold—a thing which nobody with us would do,

just as no man here would dress himself in a flowered
robe reaching to the feet, although this dress, which
with us is thought shameful, is held to be highly
respectable by the Persians. And when, at the Court
of Dionysius the tyrant of Sicily, a dress of this
description was offered to the philosophers Plato and
Aristippus, 
Plato sent it away with the words—
 
 A man am I, and never could I don
 A woman’s garb; 
but Aristippus accepted it, saying—
 
 For e’en midst revel-routs
 She that is chaste will keep her purity. 
Thus, even in the case of these sages, while the one of
them deemed this practice shameful, the other did
not.

And with us it is sinful to marry one’s mother
or one’s own sister ; but the Persians, and especially
those of them who are reputed to practise wisdom—
namely, the Magi,—marry their mothers; and the
Egyptians take their sisters in marriage, even as the
poet says —
 
 Thus spake Zeus unto Hera, his wedded wife and his
 sister. 
Moreover, Zeno of Citium says that it is not amiss for
a man to rub his mother’s private part with his own
private part, just as no one would say it was bad for
him to rub any other part of her body with his hand.
Chrysippus, too, in his book The State approves of a
father getting children by his daughter, a mother by
her son, and a brother by his sister. And Plato, in
more general terms, has declared that wives ought
to be held in common.

Masturbation, too, which we count loathsome, 
is not disapproved by Zeno; and we
are informed that others, too, practise this evil as
though it were a good thing.

Moreover, the eating of human flesh is sinful with
us, but indifferent amongst whole tribes of 
barbarians. Yet why should one speak of ‟barbarians”
when even Tydeus is said to have devoured the
brains of his enemy, and the Stoic School declare
that it is not wrong for a man to eat either other
men’s flesh or his own?

And with most of us it is sinful to defile an altar of a god with human blood,
but the Laconians lash themselves fiercely over the
altar of Artemis Orthosia in order that a great
stream of blood may flow over the altar of the
goddess. Moreover, some sacrifice a human victim
to Cronos, just as the Scythians sacrifice strangers
to Artemis; whereas we deem that holy places are
defiled by the slaying of a man.

Adulterers are, of course, punished by law with us, but amongst some
peoples intercourse with other men’s wives is a thing
indifferent; and some philosophers, too, declare that
intercourse with the wife of another is indifferent.

With us, also, the law enjoins that the fathers
should receive due care from their children; but the
Scythians cut their throats when they get to be
over sixty years old. And what wonder, seeing that
Cronos cut off his father’s genitals with a sickle, and
Zeus plunged Cronos down to Tartarus, and Athena
with the help of Hera and Poseidon attempted to
bind her father with fetters?

Moreover, Cronos decided to destroy his own children, and Solon gave
the Athenians the law ‟concerning things immune,”
by which he allowed each man to slay his own child;
but with us the laws forbid the slaying of children.
The Roman lawgivers also ordain that the children
are subjects and slaves of their fathers, and that power
over the children’s property belongs to the fathers
and not the children, until the children have obtained
their freedom like bought slaves; but this custom is
rejected by others as being despotic.

It is the law, too, that homicides should be punished; but gladiators
when they kill often receive actual commendation.
Moreover, the laws prevent the striking of free men;
yet when athletes strike free men, and often even
kill them, they are deemed worthy of rewards and
crowns.

With us, too, the law bids each man to
have one wife, but amongst the Thracians and
Gaetulians (a Libyan tribe) each man has many
wives.

Piracy, too, is with us illegal and criminal,
but with many of the barbarians it is not disapproved.
Indeed they say that the Cilicians used to regard it
as a noble pursuit, so that they held those who died
in the course of piracy to be worthy of honour. So
too Nestor—in the poet’s account —after welcoming
Telemachus and his comrades, addresses them thus—
 
 Say, are you roaming
 Aimlessly, like sea-rovers? 
Yet, if piracy had been an improper thing, he would
not have welcomed them in this friendly way, because
of his suspicion that they might be people of that
kind.

Moreover, thieving is with us illegal and criminal;
yet those who declare that Hermes is a most thievish
god cause this practice to be accounted not criminal—
for how could a god be bad? And some say that the
Laconians also punished those who thieved, not 
because they had thieved, but because they had been
found out.

Moreover, the coward and the man
who throws away his shield are in many places
punished by law; and this is why the Laconian
mother, when giving a shield to her son as he set
out for the war, said, ‟Either with this, my child, or
upon it.” Yet Archilochus, as though vaunting to
us of his flight after flinging away his shield, speaks
thus of himself in his poems—
 
 Over my shield some Saïan warrior gloats,—
 The shield I left, though loth, beside the bush—
 A flawless piece of armour; I myself
 Fled and escaped from death which endeth all.

And the Amazons used to maim the males amongst
their offspring so as to make them incapable of any
manly action, while they themselves attended to
warfare; though with us the opposite practice is
regarded as right. The Mother of the gods, also,
approves of effeminates, and the goddess would not
have decided thus if unmanliness were naturally a
bad thing.

So it is that, in regard to justice and
injustice and the excellence of manliness, there is a
great variety of opinion. 
 Around all matters of religion and_ theology
also, there rages violent controversy. For while
the majority declare that gods exist, some deny
their existence, like Diagoras of Melos, and Theodorus,
and Critias the Athenian. And of those
who maintain the existence of gods, some believe in
the ancestral gods, others in such as are constructed
in the Dogmatic systems—as Aristotle asserted
that God is incorporeal and ‟the limit of heaven,” 
the Stoics that he is a breath which permeates even
through things foul, Epicurus that he is anthropomorphic, 
Xenophanes that he is an impassive sphere.

Some, too, hold that he cares for human affairs, others
that he does not so care; for Epicurus declares that
‟what is blessed and incorruptible neither feels trouble
itself nor causes it to others.” Hence ordinary people
differ also, some saying that there is one god, others
that there are many gods and of various shapes;
in fact, they even come to share the notions of the
Egyptians who believe in gods that are dog-faced, or
hawk-shaped, or cows or crocodiles or anything else.

Hence, too, sacrificial usages, and the ritual of worship
in general, exhibit great diversity. For things
which are in some cults accounted holy are in others
accounted unholy. But this would not have been so
if the holy and the unholy existed by nature. Thus,
for example, no one would sacrifice a pig to Sarapis,
but they sacrifice it to Heracles and Asclepius. To
sacrifice a sheep to Isis is forbidden, but it is offered
up in honour of the so-called Mother of the gods
and of other deities.

To Cronos a human victim is
sacrificed at Carthage , although this is regarded by
most as an impious act. In Alexandria they offer a
cat to Horus and a beetle to Thetis—a thing which
no one here would do. To Poseidon they sacrifice a
horse; but to Apollo (especially the Didymaean 
Apollo) that animal is an abomination. It is an act
of piety to offer goats to Artemis, but not to Asclepius.

And I might add a host of similar instances, but I
forbear since my aim is to be brief. Yet surely, if a
sacrifice had been holy by nature or unholy, it would
have been deemed so by all men alike. 
 Examples similar to these may also be found in
the religious observances with regard to human diet.

For a Jew or an Egyptian priest would sooner die
than eat swine’s flesh; by a Libyan it is regarded as
a most impious thing to taste the meat of a sheep,
by some of the Syrians to eat a dove, and by others
to eat sacrificial victims. And in certain cults it is
lawful, but in others impious, to eat fish. And
amongst the Egyptians some of those who are reputed 
to be sages believe it is sinful to eat an animal’s
head, others the shoulder, others the foot, others
some other part.

And no one would bring an onion 
as an offering to Zeus Casius of Pelusium, just as
no priest of the Libyan Aphrodite would taste garlic.
And in some cults they abstain from mint, in others
from catmint, in others from parsley. And some
declare that they would sooner eat their fathers’
heads than beans.

Yet, amongst others, these things
are indifferent. Eating dog’s flesh, too, is thought
by us to be sinful, but some of the Thracians are
reported to be dog-eaters. Possibly this practice was
customary also amongst the Greeks; and on this
account Diocles, too, starting from the practices of
the Asclepiadae, prescribes that hounds’ flesh should
be given to certain patients. And some, as I have
said, even eat human flesh indifferently, a thing
which with us is accounted sinful.

Yet, if the rules
of ritual and of unlawful foods had existed by nature,
they would have been observed by all men alike. 
 A similar account may be given of reverence
towards the departed. Some wrap the dead up
completely and then cover them with earth, thinking
that it is impious to expose them to the sun; but
the Egyptians take out their entrails and embalm
them and keep them above ground with themselves.

The fish-eating tribes of the Ethiopians cast them
into the lakes, there to be devoured by the fish; the
Hyrcanians expose them as a prey to dogs, and some
of the Indians to vultures. And they say that some
of the Troglodytes take the corpse to a hill, and then
after tying its head to its feet cast stones upon it
amidst laughter, and when they have made a heap
of stones over it they leave it there.

And some of the barbarians slay and eat those who are over
sixty years old, but bury in the earth those who die
young. Some burn the dead; and of these some
recover and preserve their bones, while others show
no care but leave them scattered about. And they
say that the Persians impale their dead and
embalm them with nitre, after which they wrap
them round in bandages. How much grief others
endure for the dead we see ourselves.

Some, too, believe death itself to be dreadful and
horrible, others do not. Thus Euripides says: 
 
 Who knows if life be but the state of death,
 And death be counted life in realms below? 
And Epicurus declares: ‟Death is nothing to us;
for what is dissolved is senseless, and what is senseless
is nothing to us.” They also declare that, inasmuch as
we are compounded of soul and body, and death is a
dissolution of soul and body, when we exist death
does not exist (for we are not being dissolved), and
when death exists we do not exist, for through the
cessation of the compound of soul and body we too
cease to exist.

And Heracleitus states that both life
and death exist both in our state of life and in our
state of death; for when we live our souls are dead
and buried within us, and when we die our souls
revive and live. And some even suppose that dying
is better for us than living. Thus Euripides says; 
 
 Rather should we assemble to bewail
 The babe new-born, such ills has he to face;
 Whereas the dead, who has surcease from woe,
 With joy and gladness we should bear from home.

These lines, too, spring from the same sentiment: 
 
 Not to have been begotten at all were the best thing for
 mortals,
 Nor to have lookèd upon fiery rays of the sun:
 Or, if begotten, to hasten amain to the portals of Hades,
 And to lie unmoved robèd in masses of earth. 
We know, too, the facts about Cleobis and Biton
which Herodotus relates in his story of the Argive
priestess.

It is reported, also, that some of the 
Thracians sit round the new-born babe and chant
dirges. So, then, death should not be considered a
thing naturally dreadful, just as life should not be
considered a thing naturally good. Thus none of the
things mentioned above is naturally of this character
or of that, but all are matters of convention and
relative.

The same method of treatment may be applied also
to each of the other customs, which we have not now
described owing to the summary character of our
exposition. And even if, in regard to some of them,
we are unable to declare their discrepancy offhand,
we ought to observe that disagreement concerning
them may possibly exist amongst certain nations that
are unknown to us.

For just as, if we had been
ignorant, say, of the custom amongst the Egyptians
of marrying sisters, we should have asserted wrongly
that it was universally agreed that men ought not to
marry sisters,—even so, in regard to those practices
wherein we notice no discrepancy, it is not proper for
us to affirm that there is no disagreement about them,
since, as I said, disagreement about them may possibly
exist amongst some of the nations which are unknown
to us.

Accordingly, the Sceptic, seeing so great a diversity
of usages, suspends judgement as to the natural
existence of anything good or bad or (in general) fit
or unfit to be done, therein abstaining from the rashness
of dogmatism; and he follows undogmatically
the ordinary rules of life, and because of this he
remains impassive in respect of matters of opinion,
while in conditions that are necessitated his emotions
are moderate;

for though, as a human being, he
suffers emotion through his senses, yet because he
does not also opine that what he suffers is evil by
nature, the emotion he suffers is moderate. For the
added opinion that a thing is of such a kind is worse
than the actual suffering itself, just as sometimes the
patients themselves bear a surgical operation, while
the bystanders swoon away because of their opinion
that it is a horrible experience.

But, in fact, he who assumes that there exists by nature something good
or bad or, generally, fit or unfit to be done, is disquieted
in various ways. For when he experiences
what he regards as natural evils he deems himself to
be pursued by Furies, and when he becomes possessed
of what seems to him good things he falls into no
ordinary state of disquiet both through arrogance and
through fear of losing them, and through trying to
guard against finding himself again amongst what he
regards as natural evils;

for those who assert that goods
are incapable of being lost we shall put to silence
by means of the doubts raised by their dissension.
Hence we conclude that if what is productive of evil
is evil and to be shunned, and the persuasion that
these things are good, those evil, by nature produces
disquiet, then the assumption and persuasion that
anything is, in its real nature, either bad or good is
evil and to be shunned. 
 For the present, then, this account of things good,
evil, and indifferent is sufficient.

It is plain from what has been said above that there
can be no art of living. For if such an art exists, it
has to do with the consideration of things good, evil,
and indifferent, so that these being non-existent the
art of living also is non-existent. Further, since the
Dogmatists do not all with one accord lay down one
single art of living, but some propound one art, some
another, they are guilty of discrepancy and open to
the argument from discrepancy which I stated in our
discussion of the Good.

Yet, even if they were
all to agree in assuming that the art of living is one
—such as, for example, the celebrated ‟prudence”
whereof the Stoics dream, and which seems to be
more convincing than all the rest,—even so equally
absurd results will follow. For since ‟prudence” is a
virtue, and the Sage alone was in possession of virtue,
the Stoics, not being sages, will not be in possession
of the art of living.

And in general, since, according
to them, no art can have real existence, an art of
living cannot exist, so far as their statements go. 
 Thus, for example, they declare that art is ‟a 
composite of apprehensions,” and apprehension is ‟assent
to an apprehensive impression.” But the apprehensive
impression is indiscoverable; for every impression
is not apprehensive, nor is it possible to decide which
one of the impressions is the apprehensive impression,
since we cannot simply decide by means of every
impression which one is apprehensive and which
not, while if we require an apprehensive impression in
order to determine which is the apprehensive impression
we are wrecked on the ad infinitum fallacy, since
we are asking for another apprehensive impression so
as to determine the impression taken to be apprehensive.

And herein, too, the procedure of the Stoics,
in presenting the notion of the apprehensive impression,
is logically unsound; for in stating, on the one
hand, that an apprehensive impression is that which
is derived from a real object, and, on the other hand,
that a real object is that which is capable of giving
rise to an apprehensive impression, they fall into the
fallacy of circular reasoning. If, then, in order that
an art of living may exist, there must first exist art,
and in order that art may subsist apprehension must
pre-exist, and in order that apprehension may subsist
assent to an apprehensive impression must be apprehended,
but the apprehensive impression is indiscoverable,
—then the art of living is indiscoverable.

Another argument is this. Every art appears to
be apprehended by means of its own special products,
but there is no special product of the art of living;
for anything you might mention as its product—such
as honouring parents, paying back deposits, and all
the rest—is found to be common to ordinary folk
as well. Therefore no art of living exists. For we
shall not ascertain (as some assert) from the apparent
derivation of some speech or operation of the prudent
man from a state of prudence that it is a product of
prudence.

For the state of prudence itself is inapprehensible,
not being directly apparent either of itself or
from its products, these being common to ordinary folk
as well. And to say that we apprehend the possessor
of the art of living by the unvarying quality of his
actions is the assertion of those who over-estimate
human nature and are visionaries rather than truth-
tellers:
 
 As is the day which upon them is brought by the sire
 immortal,
 So are the minds of mortal men.

There remains the assertion that the art of living
is apprehended by means of those effects which they
describe in their books; and these being numerous
and much alike, I will extract a few of them by way
of examples. Thus, for instance, Zeno, the Master of
their sect, in his treatises, amongst many other statements
regarding the rearing of children, says this:
‟Have carnal knowledge no less and no more of a
favourite than of a non-favourite child, nor of a female
than of a male; favourite or non-favourite, males or
females, no different conduct, but the same, befits
and is befitting to all alike.”

And as concerns piety
towards parents, the same man states, in reference
to the story of Jocasta and Oedipus, that there was
nothing dreadful in his rubbing his mother: ‟If she
had been ailing in one part of her body and he
had done her good by rubbing it with his hands, it
had not been shameful; was it, then, shameful for
him to stop her grief and give her joy by rubbing
other parts, and to beget noble children by his
mother?” And with this opinion Chrysippus also
agrees. At least he says in his State: ‟I approve
of carrying out those practices—which, quite rightly,
are customary even nowadays amongst many peoples
—according to which a mother has children by her
son, the father by his daughter, the brother by
his full sister.”

And he proceeds, in the same treatises, to introduce amongst us cannibalism, 
saying: ‟And if from a living body a part be cut
off that is good for food, we should not bury it nor
otherwise get rid of it, but consume it, so that from
our parts a new part may arise.”

And in his book On Duty he says expressly, regarding the burial of
parents: ‟When our parents decease we should use
the simplest forms of burial, as though the body—like
the nails or teeth or hair—were nothing to us, and we
need bestow no care or attention on a thing like it.
Hence, also, men should make use of the flesh, when
it is good, for food, just as also when one of their own
parts, such as the foot, is cut off, it would be proper that
it and the like parts should be so used; but when the
flesh is not good, they should either bury it and leave
it, or burn it up and let the ashes lie, or cast it far away
and pay no more regard to it than to nails or hair.”

Of such a kind are most of the philosophers’
theories; but they would not dare to put them into
practice unless they lived under the laws of the
Cyclopes or Laestrygones. But if they are totally
incapable of acting thus, and their actual conduct is
common to ordinary folk as well, there is no action
peculiar to those who are suspected of possessing the
art of living. So then, if the arts must certainly be
apprehended by means of their peculiar effects, and
no effect is observed that is peculiar to the so-called
art of living, this art is not apprehended. Consequently, 
no one can positively affirm regarding it
that it is really existent.

Moreover, if the art of living comes into existence
in men, it so comes either by nature or through learning 
and teaching. But if it is by nature, then the
art of living will arise in them either in so far as they
are men, or in so far as they are not men. Certainly
not in so far as they are not men; for it is not a fact
that they are not men. But if it is in so far as they
are men, then prudence would have belonged to all
men, so that all would have been prudent and virtuous
and wise. But they describe most men as bad.

Neither, then, in so far as they are men will the art of
living belong to them. Therefore it does not accrue
by nature. And again, since they insist that art is
‟a system of co-exercised apprehensions,” they
make it evident that the art under discussion, as well
as all other arts, is acquired rather by some sort of
effort and learning.

But neither is it acquired by teaching and learning.
For in order that these should subsist, three things
must first be agreed upon—the matter which is being
taught, the teacher and the learner, and the method
of learning. But none of these subsists; neither,
then, does teaching.

Thus, for instance, the matter of instruction is
either true or false; if false it would not be taught;
for they assert that falsehood is non-existent, and of
non-existents there could be no teaching. Nor yet
if it were said to be true; for we have shown in our
chapter ‟On the Criterion” that truth is non-existent. 
If, then, neither the false nor the true
is being taught, and besides these there is nothing
capable of being taught (for no one, to be sure, will
say that, though these are unteachable, he teaches
only dubious lessons ), then nothing is taught.

And the matter taught is either apparent or non-evident.
But if it is apparent, it will not require
teaching; for things apparent appear to all alike.
And if it is non-evident, then, since things non-evident
are, as we have often shown, inapprehensible
owing to the undecided controversy about them, it
will be incapable of being taught; for how could
anyone teach or learn what he does not apprehend?
But if neither the apparent is taught nor the 
non-evident, nothing is taught.

Again, what is taught is either corporeal or
incorporeal, and each of these being either apparent or
non-evident is incapable of being taught, according
to the argument we have just now stated. Nothing,
therefore, is taught.

Further, either the existent is taught or the non-
existent. Now the non-existent is not taught; for
if the non-existent is taught the non-existent will be
true, since teaching is held to be of things true. And
if it is true, it will also subsist; for they declare that
‟a true thing is what subsists and is opposed to
something.” ‟But it is absurd to say that the non-
existent subsists; therefore the non-existent is not
taught.

Yet neither is the existent. For if the
existent is taught, it is taught either in so far as it is
existent or in so far as it is something else. But if it
is to be taught in so far as it is existent, it will be one
of the existing things, and therefore a thing incapable
of being taught; for teaching ought to proceed
from certain acknowledged facts which require no
teaching. Therefore the existent, in so far as it is
existent, is not capable of being taught.

Nor, in fact, in so far as it is something else. For the existent has
not anything else which is non-existent attached to it,
so that if the existent in so far as it is existent is
not taught, neither will it be taught in so far as it is
something else; for whatsoever thing is attached to
it is existent. And further, whether the existent
thing which, they will say, is taught be apparent or
non-evident, as it is subject to the absurdities we have
stated, it will be incapable of being taught. But if
neither the existent nor the non-existent is taught,
there is nothing that is taught.

Now with the refutation of this is involved that of
both the teacher and the learner; though they are
just as much open to doubt on their own account.
For either the expert artist teaches the expert, or
the non-expert the non-expert, or the non-expert the
expert, or the expert the non-expert. Now the expert
does not teach the expert; for neither of them, qua
expert, needs teaching. Nor does the non-expert
teach the non-expert, any more than the blind can
lead the blind. Nor the non-expert the expert, for
it would be ridiculous.

The only thing left is to say
that the expert teaches the non-expert; and this,
too, is a thing impossible. For it is declared to be
wholly impossible that an expert artist should exist,
since neither do we see anyone existing spontaneously
and from birth as an expert, nor does anyone turn
into an expert from being a non-expert. For either
one lesson and one apprehension can make an expert
of the non-expert or they cannot do so at all.

But if one apprehension makes the non-expert an
expert, it will be open to us to declare, firstly, that
art is not a system of apprehensions; for the man
who knows nothing at all would be termed an expert
if only he were taught a single lesson of art. And,
secondly, should anyone assert that, as soon as a man
who has acquired some principles of art and still
needs one more, and because of this is non-expert,
acquires also that one principle, he at once becomes
an expert instead of a non-expert by means of one
apprehension, he will be making a random assertion.

For in the case of individual men we could not point
to one who, being still a non-expert, will become an
expert by acquiring one additional principle; for no
one, to be sure, has such a command of the numeration
of the principles of each art as to be able to say,
by numbering off the known principles, how many
are still needed to make up the full number of the
principles of the art. So then the learning of one
principle does not make the non-expert an expert.

But if this is true, seeing that no one acquires all the 
principles of the arts at once, but each .one singly,
if at all—this point also being granted by way of
assumption—the man who is said to acquire the principles
of the art one by one will not be termed an
expert; for we recall the conclusion that the learning
of one principle cannot make an expert of the non-
expert. No one, then, becomes an expert from
being a non-expert. Hence, on these grounds too,
the expert artist appears to be non-existent. And
therefore the teacher also.

Neither can the so-called learner, if he is non- 
expert, learn and apprehend the principles of the art
wherein he is non-expert. For just as the man who
is blind from birth, in so far as he is blind, will not
acquire perception of colours, nor, similarly, he who
is deaf from birth, of sound, so too the non-expert
will not apprehend the principles of the art wherein
he is non-expert. For should he do so the same man
would be both expert and non-expert in the same
things—non-expert since he is such by hypothesis,
and expert since he has apprehension of the principles 
of the art. Hence, neither does the expert
teach the non-expert.

But if neither the expert teaches the expert, nor the non-expert the non-
expert, nor the non-expert the expert, nor the expert
the non-expert, and these are all the alternatives
possible, then neither the teacher exists nor the
taught.

And if neither the learner nor the teacher exists, the method of teaching also is abolished.

And it is no less disputed on the following grounds. The method
of teaching comes to exist either by ocular evidence
or by speech; but it does not come to exist either
by ocular evidence or by speech, as we shall show;
therefore the method of learning also is not easy to
discover. 
 Now teaching does not come by ocular evidence,
since ocular evidence consists in things exhibited.
But what is exhibited is apparent to all; and the
apparent, qua apparent, is perceptible by all; and
what is perceptible by all in common is incapable of
being taught; therefore nothing is capable of being
taught by ocular evidence.

Nor, in fact, is anything taught by speech. For
speech either signifies something or signifies nothing.
But if it signifies nothing, neither will it be capable
of teaching anything. And if it signifies something, 
it does so either by nature or by convention.
But it is not significant by nature because
all men do not understand all when they hear
them, as is the case with Greeks hearing barbarians
talk or barbarians hearing Greeks.

And if it is significant by convention, evidently those who
have grasped beforehand the objects to which the
several words are assigned will perceive those objects,
not through being taught by the words things of
which they were ignorant, but by recollecting and
recovering things which they knew; whereas those
who require to learn what they do not know, and
who are ignorant of the objects to which the words
are assigned, will have no perception of anything.

Consequently, the method of learning also will be
incapable of subsisting. For, in fact, the teacher
ought to impart to the learner an apprehension of
the principles of the art he is teaching, so that the
latter by apprehending them as a system may thus
become an expert artist. But, as we have shown
above, apprehension is nothing; therefore also the
method of teaching cannot subsist. But if neither
the matter taught exists, nor the teacher and the
learner, nor the method of learning, then neither
learning exists nor teaching.

Such, then, are the objections put forward regarding
learning and teaching in general. And the same
difficulties may also be alleged in the case of the
so-called art of living. Thus, for instance, we have
shown above that the matter taught, namely prudence,
is non-existent; and both the teacher and the
learner are non-existent. For either the prudent
man will teach the prudent the art of living, or the
imprudent the imprudent, or the imprudent the
prudent, or the prudent the imprudent; but none
of these teaches any other; therefore the so-called
art of living is not taught.

Probably it is superfluous even to refer to the other cases; but if the prudent
man teaches prudence to the imprudent, and prudence is 
‟knowledge of things good and evil and
neither,” the imprudent man, as he does not possess
prudence, possesses ignorance of the things that are
good and evil and neither; and since he possesses
nothing but ignorance thereof, when the prudent
man teaches him what things are good and evil and
neither, he will merely hear what is said and will not
get to know the things. For if he should grasp them
while in a state of imprudence, then imprudence too
will be capable of perceiving what things are good
and evil and neither.

But, according to them, imprudence
is certainly not capable of perceiving these
things, since, if it were, the imprudent man will be
prudent. Therefore, according to the definition of
prudence, the imprudent man does not grasp what
is said or done by the prudent. And, as he fails to
grasp, he will not be taught by him, especially since,
as we have said above, he cannot be taught either
by ocular evidence or by means of speech. But, in
fine, if the so-called art of living is not imparted to
anyone either by means of learning and teaching or
by nature, then the art of living, so harped on by
the philosophers, is indiscoverable.

Yet even were one to grant, as an act of bounty,
that this visionary art of living is imparted to someone,
it will show itself to be hurtful to its possessors,
and a cause of perturbation, rather than beneficial.

Thus, for instance—to take a few arguments out of many by way of example—the art of living might be thought to benefit the wise man by furnishing him with temperance in his impulses towards good and repulsions from evil.

He, then, who is termed by them a temperate sage is called temperate either in
virtue of his never feeling the impulse towards good
or repulsion from evil, or in virtue of his possessing
slight impulses in either direction and overcoming
them by reason.

But in respect of his freedom from
bad resolutions he will not be self-controlled; for he
will not control what he does not possess. And just
as one would not call a eunuch temperate in sex-
indulgence, or a man with a poor stomach temperate
in respect of the pleasures of the table (for they feel
no attraction at all towards such things, so that they
might rise superior to the attraction through temperance),
—in the same way we ought not to term the
sage temperate, because he possesses no natural
feeling over which he may exercise control.

And if they shall claim that he is temperate in virtue
of his forming bad resolutions but overcoming them
by reason, then, firstly, they will be admitting that
prudence was of no benefit to him just when he was
in a state of perturbation and needed assistance, and,
secondly, he is found to be even more unfortunate
than those they term bad. For if he feels an impulse
towards anything, he is certainly perturbed; while
if he overcomes it by reason, he retains the evil,
and because of this he is more perturbed than the
bad man who no longer experiences this feeling;
for the latter,

though he is perturbed if he is feeling 
an impulse, yet ceases from his perturbation if he
gains his desires. 
 So, then, the sage does not become temperate in
virtue of his prudence; or if he does become so, he
is of all men the most miserable, so that the art of
living has brought him no benefit but the uttermost
perturbation. And we have shown above that the
man who believes that he possesses the art of living,
and that by means of it he discerns what things are
naturally good and what bad, is extremely perturbed
both when good things are his and when evil things.

We must, then, declare that, if there is no agreement 
as to the existence of things good and bad and
indifferent, and the art of living is possibly non-
existent, or—if its existence is provisionally admitted
—brings no benefit to its possessors but, on the
contrary, causes them extreme perturbations, then
the Dogmatists would seem to be vainly puffed up in
respect of the so-called Ethical division of what they
term ‟philosophy.”

Having now treated of the subject of Ethics also
at sufficient length for an account in outline, 
we conclude at this point our third book, and with it the
complete treatise on ‟Pyrrhonean Outlines,” adding
only this final section:

The Sceptic, being a lover of his kind, desires to
cure by speech, as best he can, the self-conceit
and rashness of the Dogmatists. So, just as the
physicians who cure bodily ailments have remedies
which differ in strength, and apply the severe ones
to those whose ailments are severe and the milder to
those mildly affected,—so too the Sceptic propounds
arguments which differ in strength,

and employs those which are weighty and capable by their stringency of
disposing of the Dogmatists' ailment, self-conceit, in
cases where the mischief is due to a severe attack of
rashness, while he employs the milder arguments in
the case of those whose ailment of conceit is superficial and
easy to cure, and whom it is possible to restore to 
health by milder methods of persuasion.
Hence the adherent of Sceptic principles does not
scruple to propound at one time arguments that are
weighty in their persuasiveness, and at another time
such as appear less impressive,—and he does so on
purpose, as the latter are frequently sufficient to
enable him to effect his object.