I. 1 The vision which Isaiah the son of Amoz saw, which
he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem, in the reign of Uzziah,
Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, who reigned over Judah.

2 Hear, O heaven, and give ear, O earth; for the Lord hath
spoken, I have begotten sons and upraised them, but they have
set me at nought.

3 The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master’s crib:
but Israel knoweth me not, and the people understandeth me not.

4 Ah, sinful nation, a people full of sins, an evil seed, lawless
sons: ye have forsaken the Lord, and angered the Holy One of
Israel.

5 Why should ye be yet smitten, (for) transgressing further?
every head (turns) to weariness, and every heart to grief.

6 From the feet to the head, neither wound, nor stripe, nor
inflamed hurt: there is no means to apply a balm, or oil, or
bandages.

7 Your land is desolate, your cities are burnt with ﬁre; your
country, strangers devour it before your face, and it has been
desolated, ruined by stranger peoples.

8 The daughter of Zion shall be left like a booth in a vineyard,
and like a watching-hut in a cucumber garden, like a city
besieged.

9 And unless the Lord of Hosts had left us a seed there, we
should have become as Sodom, and we should have been made
like as Gomorrah.

10 Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom; attend ye
to the law of God, O people of Gomorrah.

11 What is the abundance of your sacrifices to me? saith the
Lord: I am full of burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of lambs,
and the blood of bulls and of goats I desire not,

12 Not even if ye come to appear before me. For who hath
demanded this of your hands? Tread my court

13 Ye shall not, any more; if ye bring me ﬁne ﬂour, it is vain;
incense, it is an abomination to me; your new moons, and the
sabbaths, and a great day, I cannot bear: fasting and idleness,

14 And your new moons, and your feasts, my soul hateth;
ye are become to me a surfeit! no longer will I let your sins be.

15 When ye stretch out your hands toward me, I will turn away
mine eyes from you; and if ye multiply your petition, I will not
listen to you; for your hands are full of blood.

16 Wash you, become clean; take away your wickednesses
from your souls before mine eyes; cease from your wickednesses,

17 Learn to do well; seek out judgment, deliver one wronged,
judge for the orphan, justify the widow.

18 And ’come, and let us be convicted, saith the Lord; and if
your sins be as a scarlet thing, I will make them white as snow;
and if they be as crimson, I will make them white as wool.

19 And if ye be willing, and hearken unto me, ye shall eat the
good things of the land:

20 But if ye be not willing, neither hearken unto me, a sword ’
shall devour you; for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken this.

21 How is the faithful city Zion become a harlot! (once)
full of judgment, and in her righteousness did rest; but now
murderers.

22 Your silver is base; thy hucksters mix the wine with water:

23 Thy rulers are disobedient; companions of thieves, that
love gifts, that pursue a recompense; that judge not for orphans,
and attend not to the cause of a widow.

24 Therefore thus saith the Ruler, the Lord of Hosts, Ah, the
strong ones of Israel! for my wrath shall not cease upon mine
adversaries, and I will exact judgment from mine enemies.

25 And I will turn mine band upon thee, and burn thee into
purity, and the disobedient will I destroy, and take away all
transgressors from thee, and will humble all arrogant ones.

26 And I will set up thy judges as in former time, and thy
counsellors as from the beginning; and after that thou shalt be
called City of righteousness, faithful mother-city Zion.

27 For with judgment shall her captivity be saved, and with
mercy.

28 And the transgressors and the sinners together shall be
broken in pieces, and they that forsake the Lord shall be brought to an end.
to an end.

29 For they shall be ashamed for their idols, which themselves
desired, and shall be ashamed for their gardens, which they longed for.

30 For they shall be as a terebinth that hath cast off its leaves,
and as a park with no water.

31 And their strength shall be as a stalk of ﬂax, and their
works as sparks of ﬁre, and the transgressors and the sinners
shall be burned up together, and there shall be none that shall
quench them.

II. 1 The word that came from the Lord to Isaiah the son
of Amoz concerning Judah and concerning Jerusalem

2 For in the last days shall the mountain of the Lord be
clearly seen, and the house of God upon the top of the mountains,
and it shall be uplifted above the hills, and all the nations shall
come unto it.

3 And many nations shall go, and shall say, Come, let us go up
into the mountain of the Lord, and into the house of the God of
Jacob; and he will proclaim to us his way, and we will walk in it.
For out of Zion shall a law come forth, and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem.

4 And he shall judge between the nations, and shall convince
much people; and they shall beat their Swords into ploughshares,
and their spears into pruning hooks; and nation shall not any
more take a sword against nation, and they shall not learn to war
any more.

5 And now, Ο house of Jacob, come, let us walk by the light
of the Lord.

6 For he hath given up his people, the house of Israel; because
their country is ﬁlled with omens, as at the ﬁrst, like the land of
the Strangers, and many strange children are born to them.

7 For their country is ﬁlled with silver and gold, and there
is no number to their treasures; and their land is ﬁlled with
horses, and there is no number to their chariots:

8 And the land is ﬁlled with abominations, the works of their
hands, and they worship things which their own ﬁngers have
made:

9 And a mean man boweth down, and a great man is humbled,
and I will not let them be.

10 And now, enter into the rocks, and hide yourselves in the
earth, from before the fear of the Lord, and from the glory of his
strength, when he ariseth to shatter the earth.

11 For the eyes of the Lord (are) lifted high, but man (is)
humble: and the uplifting of men shall be humbled, and the
Lord alone shall be uplifted in that day.

12 For there is a day of the Lord of Hosts against every
worker of pride, and overweening one, and against every one that
is high and lofty, and they shall be humbled:

13 And against every cedar of Lebanon, of them that are high
and lofty, and against every oak-tree of Bashan,

14 And against every mountain, and against every high
hill,

15 And against every high tower, and against every high
wall,

16 And against every ship of the sea, and against every sight
of the beauty of ships:

17 And every man shall be humbled. and the uplifting of men
shall fall, and the Lord alone shall be uplifted in that day.

18. And all the works of men's hands shall they hide away,

19 Carrying them into the caves, and into the rents of the
rocks, and into the holes of the earth, from before the fear of the
Lord, and from the glory of his strength, when he ariseth to
shatter the earth.

20 In that day shall a man cast out his abominations, the
silver and the golden, which he made to worship, to the vain ones
and to the bats;

21 To go into the holes of the solid rock, and into the rents of
the rocks, from before the face of the Lord, and from the glory of
his strength, when he ariseth to shatter the earth.
* * * *

III. 1 Now behold, the ruler, the Lord of Hosts, will take
away from Judah and from Jerusalem him that is strong and her
that is strong, the strength of bread and the strength of water,

2 Giant, and strong man, and man of war, and judge, and
prophet, and diviner, and elder,

3 And captain of ﬁfty, and wonderful counsellor, and skilful
artificer, and understanding listener,

4 And I will set up youths as their rulers, and mockers shall
lord it over them.

5 And the people shall fall together, each against another, and
each against his neighbour; the child shall stumble against the
elder, the dishonoured against the honourable.

6 For a man shall take hold of his brother, or of his father's
kinsman, saying, Thou hast a cloke, be thou our leader, and let
my meat be subject to thee.

7 And he shall answer and say in that day, I will not be thy
leader; for there is no bread in my house, neither a cloke; I will
not be a leader of this people.

8 For Jerusalem is abandoned, and Judah is fallen down; and
their tongues (are) with transgression, (they are) disobedient
toward the Lord; wherefore now is their glory humbled.

9 And the shame of their face is risen up against them; and
they have proclaimed their sin as of Sodom, and made it plain.
Woe unto their soul! for they have counselled evil counsel
against themselves,

10 Saying, Let us bind the just, for he is of ill service to us:
therefore shall they eat the fruit of their works.

11 Woe to the transgressor ἕ evil shall befall him according to
the works of his hands.

12 My people, your exactors glean you, and the tax gatherers
shall lord it over you: my people, they that call you happy cause
you to err, and confound the path of your feet.

13 But now shall the Lord stand up for judgment, and shall
set up his people for judgment.

14 The Lord himself shall come to judgment with the elders
of the people, and the rulers thereof. But ye, why did ye burn
my vineyard, and the spoil of the poor is in your houses?

15 Why do ye wrong my people, and shame the face of the
poor?

16 Thus saith the Lord, Because the daughters of Zion are
uplifted, and walk with uplifted neck, and with winkings of the
eyes, and in the passage of their feet both sweeping their skirts
and mincing with their feet the while,

17 (So) also shall God humble the principal daughters of Zion,
and the Lord shall discover their form

18 In that day; and the Lord will take away the glory of their
apparel, and their adomments, and the braidings, and the fringes,
and the crescents,

19 And the pendant, and the adornment of the face,

20 And the ordering of the adornment of their glory, and the
bracelets, and the armlets, and the braiding (of hair), and the
bangles, and the ﬁnger rings, and the earrings,

21 And the garments edged with purple, and shaded with
purple,

22 And the hangings about the house, and the Laconian
gauzes,

23 And the (garments) of ﬁne linen, and of blue, and scarlet,
and the ﬁne linen embroidered with gold and with blue, and the
reclining veils.

24 And there shall be, instead of a sweet smell, dust; and
instead of a girdle thou shalt gird thyself with a rope, and instead
of the golden adornment of the head thou shalt have baldness
because of thy works, and instead of the purple shaded robe thou
shalt gird thyself about with sackcloth.

25 And thy son. the fairest, whom thou lovest, shall fall by
the sword, and your strong men shall fall by the sword, and shall
be humbled:

26 And the coffers of your ornaments shall mourn, and thou
shalt be left alone, and shalt be trodden into the earth.

IV. 1 And seven women shall take hold of one man, saying,
We will eat our own bread, and wear our own clothing; only let
thy name be called upon us; take away our reproach.

2 But in that day shall God shine in counsel with glory upon
the earth, to uplift and to glorify that which is left of Israel.

3 And it shall be, that which is left behind in Zion, and left
in Jerusalem, they shall be called holy, all they who were written
unto life in Jerusalem.

4 For the Lord shall cleanse the ﬁlth of the sons and of the
daughters of Zion, and shall purge the blood from the midst of
them, by the spirit of judgment <and the spirit of birning>

5 And he shall come, and it shall be, every place of the mount
Zion, and all that is round about her; a cloud shall shadow it by
day, and like as when smoke and as a light of ﬁre burneth by
night; it shall be sheltered by all the glory (of the Lord),

6 And it shall be for a shadow from heat, and as a covering
and a hiding place from stress and from rain storm.

V. 1 Now will I sing for my beloved a song of my loved one
for my vineyard. My beloved hath a vineyard on a hill-top, in
a fertile place;

2 And I set a hedge around it, and fenced it, and planted
a vine of Sorek, and built a tower in the midst of it, and digged
a wine-fat therein; and I waited for it to bring forth a cluster of
grapes, and it brought forth thorns.

3 And now, man of Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem,
judge ye betwixt me and my vineyard.

4 What shall I do yet for my vineyard, that I have not done
for it? because I waited for it to bring forth a cluster of grapes,
but it brought forth thorns.

5 But now I will declare to you what I will do to my vineyard;
I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be plundered; and
destroy the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down;

6 And I will abandon my vineyard, and it shall not be pruned,
nor digged; and there shall come up into it thorns, as into
a waste place; and I will command the clouds, to shower no
rain upon it.

7 For the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel,
and the man of Judah a beloved young plant; I waited for (him)
to bring forth judgment, but he brought forth transgression, and
not righteousness, but a cry.

8 Woe, they that join house to house, and set ﬁeld next to
ﬁeld, that they may rob somewhat from their neighbour; will ye
dwell alone upon the earth?

9 For this was heard in the ears of the Lord of Hosts; For if
houses become many, they shall be a desolation; great ones and
fair, and there shall be none that inhabit them.

10 For where ten yoke of oxen plough, it shall yield one jar,
and he that soweth six bushels shall get three measures.

11 Woe, they that rise up early, and follow strong drink; that
tarry till late; for wine shall burn them up.

12 For with harp, and psaltery, and tabrets, and pipes, drink
they their wine; but they regard not the works of the Lord,
and the works of his hands they consider not.

13 Therefore is my people become captive, because they
know not the Lord; and is become a multitude of dead bodies,
because of famine and thirst for water.

14 And Hades enlarged his appetite, and opened his mouth,
continually; and her glorious, and great, and rich ones, and her
pestilences, shall descend.

15 And the mean man shall be humbled, and the great man
shall be dishonoured, and the eyes that are lifted up shall be
humbled:

16 And the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and
God, the Holy One, shall be glorified in righteousness.

17 And they that are spoiled shall graze as bulls, and the
waste places of them that are taken away shall lambs eat.

18 Woe, they that drag along their sins as with a long rcpe,
and their transgressions as with a cow-hide chariot trace:

19 That say, Let him speedily bring near what he will do, that
we may see; and let the counsel of the Holy One &003C; of Israel
come, that we may perceive:

20 Woe, they that call evil good, and good evil; that set darkness
as light, and light as darkness; that set bitter as sweet, and
sweet as bitter!

21 Woe, they that are prudent in themselves, and have understanding
in their own sight!

22 Woe, they that are strong among you, that drink wine, and
the powerful ones, that mingle the strong drink:

23 That justify the impious for ’ sake, and remove the
justice of the just.

24 Therefore, like as a reed shall be burned by coals of fire.
and burned up by blazing ﬂame, their root shall be as chaff, and
their blossom shall go up as whirling dust: for they desired not
the law of the Lord of Hosts, but they provoked the oracle of <
Holy One of > Israel.

25 And the Lord of Hosts was wroth with anger against his
people, and laid his hand upon them, and smote them; and the
mountains were provoked (to anger), and their carcases became as
dung in the midst of the way. Amid all this his wrath is not
turned away, but his hand is still upraised.

26 Therefore he shall raise up a signal among the nations afar
off, and shall hiss unto them from the end of the earth; and,
behold, quickly they come swiftly.

27 They shall not <hunger nor> grow weary, nor nod, nor
sleep, nor shall they loose their girdles from their loins, nor shall
the thongs of their sandals be broken:

28 Whose darts are sharp, and their bows bent; their ’
hoofs are as solid rock; the wheels of their chariots were counted
as a whirlwind.

29 They spring like lions, and are come up like a ’s
whelp; and he shall take hold, and shall roar as a wild beast, and
shall cast them out, and there shall be none that delivereth them,

30 And he shall roar because of them, in that day, as the voice
of a surging sea; and they shall look upon the earth, and behold,
cruel darkness in their dismay.

VI. 1 And it came to pass, in the year that king Uzziah died,
I saw the Lord seated upon a throne, (that was) high and lifted
up, and the house was full of his glory.

2 And seraphim stood around him; each one had six wings;
and with twain they covered their face, and with twain they
covered their feet, and with twain they did fly.

3 And they cried one to another and said, Holy, holy, holy, is
the Lord of Hosts; all the earth is full of his glory.

4 And the lintel was lifted up, at the voice with which they
cried, and the house was ﬁlled with smoke.

5 And I said, O wretched me, for I am amazed; for being
(but) a man, and with impure lips, I dwell in the midst of a
people with impure lips: and I have seen the King, the Lord of
Hosts, with mine eyes.

6 And there was sent to me one of the seraphim, and in his
hand he had a coal of ﬁre, which he had taken with the tongs
from the altar;

7 And he touched my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched
thy lips, and shall take away thy transgressions, and shall purify
thy sins.

8 And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom am I to
serial, and who will go to this people? And I said, Here am I;
sen me.

9 And he said, Go, and say to this people, By hearing ye shall
bear, and not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not
perceive.

10 For the heart of this people. is made fat, and with their
ears they hear dully, and their eyes have they closed; lest at any
time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
pgidrirstand with their heart, and should return, when I will heal
them.

11. And I said, Until when, Lord P And he said, Until cities be
desolated, because they are not inhabited, and houses, because
there are no men; and the land shall be left desolate.

12 And after this, God shall far remove men, and they that
are left shall be multiplied upon the earth.

13 And still upon it is the tenth part, and again it shall be for
plunder; as a terebinth, and as an oak, when it is torn from its
place.

VII. 1 And it came to pass, in the days of Ahaz the son of
Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, there went up Rezin
the king of Aram and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel,
against Jerusalem to war against it, and they were not able to
besiege it.

2 And it was reported to the house of David, saying, Aram

hath made agreement with Ephraim; and his soul was distraught,
and the soul of his people, like as when a tree in a forest is shaken
with the wind.

3 And the Lord said unto Isaiah, Go forth to meet Ahaz, thou,
and he that is left, Jashub thy son, at the pool of the upper road
of the fuller's ﬁeld;

4 And thou shalt say to him, Take heed, that thou be quiet
and fear thou not, neither let thy soul be faint, at these two logs
of smoking firehrands; for when the anger of my wrath is come,
I will heal again.

5 And (as for) the son of Aram and the son of Remaliah,
because they have counselled evil counsel concerning thee, saying,
ἢ 6 We will go up against Judah, and let us talk with them, and
turn them away to us, and we will make king over them the son
of Tabeal:

7 Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, This counsel shall not abide,
neither shall it be.

8 But the head of Aram is Damascus, and the head of
Damascus is Rezin; but yet within threescore and ﬁve years shall
the kingdom of Ephraim fail from (being) a people.

9 And the head of Ephraim is. Samaria, and the head of
Samaria is ’s son: and if ye trust not, neither shall ye
understand.

10 And the Lord spake unto Ahaz, saying,
rr Ask thee a sign from the Lord thy God, (down) to the
depth or (up) to the height.

12 And Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the
Lord.

13 And he said, Hear ye now, house of David; is it a small
thing for you to provoke men, and how are ye provoking the
Lord?

14 Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold,
the virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and
thou shalt call his name Immanuel.

15 Butter and honey shall he eat; before he learn to prefer
evil, he shall choose out what is good:

16 For before the child learn good or bad, (he resisteth wickedness
to choose out what is good,) the land which thou fearest
shall be abandoned from before them.

17 But God shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and
upon thy ’s house, days that have not yet come since the
day when he tdok away Ephraim from Judah; the king of the
Assyrians.

18 And it shall be in that day, the Lord shall hiss to the ﬂies,
that which ’ over a part of the river of Egypt, and to the bee
which is in the land of the Assyrians.

19 And they shall all come, and shall rest in the valleys of the
land, and in the holes of the rocks, and into the caverns, and into
every cleft, and upon every tree.

20 In that day shall theLord shave with the razor that is great
and drunken, which is beyond the river of the king of the
Assyrians; the head, and the hair of the feet, and the beard
shall he take away.

21 And it shall be in that day, a man shall nourish a heifer of
kine, and two sheep:

22 And it shall be, from their giving very much milk, butter
and honey shall everyone eat, that is left upon the land.

23 And it shall be, in that day, every place, wheresoever there
be a thousand vines at a thousand Shekels, they shall be for barren
land and thorn.

24 With arrow and bow shall they enter there; for barren and
thorn shall all the land be;

25 And every mountain shall be deeply ploughed; and fear
shall not come thither; for from the barren land and thorn it shall
be for the feeding of a sheep, and the treading of an ox.

VIII. I And the Lord said unto me, Take thee a leaf of
a new great sheet and write upon it with a ’s pen, (For)
to make speedily a plundering of spoils; for it is at hand.

2 And make faithful men my witnesses, Uriah, and Zechariah,
the son of Berechiah.

3 And he went in unto the prophetess; and she conceived,
and bare a son. And the Lord said to me, Call his name
Quickly spoil, speedily plunder:

4 For before the child learn to call father or mother, (one)
shall take the power of Damascus and the spoils of Samaria
before the king of the Assyrians.

5 And the Lord spake further unto me yet,

6 Because this people desire not the water of Siloam which
goeth quietly, but desire to have ’n and the son of Remaliah
for king over you:

7 Therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth upon you the ’s
water, that is strong and mighty, the king of the Assyrians and
his glory; and he shall go up upon every valley of yours, and
walk about upon every wall of yours.

8 And he shall take away from Judah (any) man who shall
be able to raise the head, if it be possible to accomplish aught:
and his camp shall be #x003C;so as to fill> the Wide spaces of thy
God (is) with us.

9. Learn, ye nations, and be overcome: ye shall hearken, unto
the end of the earth; when ye are waxed strong, be overcome;
I or if ye wax strong again, ye shall be overcome again.

10 And whatsoever counsel ye take, the Lord shall scatter it:
and whatsoever word ye speak, it shall not abide for you; for
the LOrd God is with us.

11 Thus saith the Lord God, With the strong hand do they
dispute the passage of the way of this people, saying,

12 Never speak ye stubbornly; for all that this people
speaketh is stubborn; but fear ye not the fear of it, nor be
confounded:

13 Sanctify the Lord himself; and he himself shall be your Fear.

14 And if thou hast trusted ’in him, he shall be for a sanctuary
to thee; and ye shall not come upon him as a stumbling block
of a stone, nor as an offence of a rock. But the house of Jacob
(is) in a snare, and men that sit in Jerusalem in a hollow.

15 Therefore shall many among them be powerless, and shall
fall, and shall be crushed; and men that are in safety shall
draw near, and shall be taken.

16 Then shall they be manifest, who seal up the law, that
they should learn.

17 And he shall say, I will wait for God, that hath turned his
face from the house of Jacob, and will have my trust in him.

18 Behold me, and the children which God hath given me.
And they shall be for signs and wonders in Israel from the Lord
of Hosts, who dwelleth in the mount Zion.

19 And if they say unto you, Seek ye them that speak from
the earth, and the ventriloquists, the babblers that talk from the
belly: is it not a nation with its God? Why are they to seek
out the dead concerning the living?

20 For he hath given them a law for their help: that they
may speak not as this word, concerning which there is no giving
of gifts.

21 And there shall come upon you cruel famine; and it
shall be, when ye hunger, ye shall be grieved, and shall revile
your ruler, and your country's (laws); and they shall look up
to the heaven above,

22 And shall look unto the earth beneath; and behold,
affiction and straitening and darkness, strait dismay and darkness
that they see not. 
 And he that is in straitness shall not be dismayed until a season.

IX. 1 Drink this ﬁrst, do it quickly, country of Zabulon,
land of Naphthali, by the way of the sea, and the rest that
dwell by the sea shore and across Jordan, Galilee of the nations,
the parts of Judah.

2 people that sittest in darkness, see ye a great light; ye
that dwell in the land and in the shadow of death, a light shall
shine upon you.

3 The most part of the people, which thou broughtest back
in thy joy, shall even joy before thee as they that joy in harvest,
and like as they joy that divide spoils.

4 For the yoke that lay upon them shall be taken away, and
the rod that was upon their neck; for the Lord hath scattered in
pieces the rod of the exactors, as in the day that was upon Midian.

5 For every garment collected with guile, and cloke with
reconciling shall they repay, and they shall be willing, if they
had been burnt with ﬁre.

6 For a child is born unto us, a son also is given unto us,
upon whose shoulder was the government; and he shall call
his name Messenger of great counsel [Wonderful Counsellor,
Mighty, Powerful, Prince of Peace, Father of the Age to come]:
for I will bring peace upon the rulers, peace and health to him.

7 Great is his rule, and of his peace there is no limit, upon
the throne of David, and his kingdom, to order it and to take
hold upon it in righteousness and in judgment from henceforth
and for ever; the jealousy of the Lord of hosts will do this.

8 The Lord sent death upon Jacob, and it came upon Israel.

9 And they shall learn, all the people of Ephraim and they
that sit in Samaria, saying, in pride and uplifted heart,

10 The bricks are fallen, but come, let us hew stones; and
let us cut down sycamines and cedars, and build ourselves a tower.

11 And God will smite them that rise up against mount Zion
against them, and will. scatter their enemies,

12 Syria from the sunrising, and the Greeks from the sunsetting;
them that devour Israel with open mouth. For all this
his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is still upraised.

13 And the people turned not back until it was smitten, and
they sought not out the Lord.

14 And the Lord hath taken away from Israel head and tail,
great and small, in one day; an elder, and respecters of persons;
this is the beginning,

15 And a prophet that teacheth transgressions; he is the tail.

16 And they that call this people happy shall be causing them
to err, and they cause them to err, that they may swallow them up.

17 Therefore God shall not rejoice over the young men, and
on their fatherless and widows shall he not have mercy; for
they are all transgressors and wicked, and every mouth ’peaketh
unjustly. For all this his wrath is not turned away, but his
hand is still upraised.

18 And their. transgression shall burn as a ﬁre, and shall be
devoured by ﬁre like dry grass; and it shall burn in the thickets
of the forest, and shall eat up all that is round about the bills:

19 Because of the wrath of the anger of the Lord shall the
whole land be burned up, and the people shall be as though
utterly burned by ﬁre. A man shall not pity his brother,

20 But he shall turn aside to the right, because he shall be
hungry, and shall eat from the left, and shall not be satisfied:
eating (every) man the ﬂesh of his [brother's] arm.

21 For Manasseh shall eat of Ephraim, and Ephraim of
Manasseh; for together shall they besiege Judah. For all this
his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is still upraised.

X. 1 Woe to them that write wickedness; for they write,
and write wickedness,

2 Perverting the cause of beggars, and robbing the poor
among my people of their judgment, so that the widow serveth
them for spoil, and the fatherless for plunder.

3 And what will they do in the day of their visitation? for
the affliction come on you from far; and to whom will ye
ﬂee for help? and where will ye leave your glory,

4 That it fall not into captivity? And they shall fall under
the slain. For all this his wrath is not turned away, but his
hand is still upraised.

5 Ah, for the Assyrians; the rod of my wrath and of anger
(is) in their hands.

6 I dorsend mine anger against a transgressing nation, and to
my. people will I give a charge to take spoils and plunder, and
to tread down the cities and turn them to a dust cloud.

7 But he himself thought not thus, and not thus hath he
considered in his heart; but his mind shall change, even to
destroy nations not a few.

8 And if they say unto him, Thou alone art ruler,

9 Then shall he say, Did I not take the country above
Babylon, and Calno, where the tower was built? and I took
Arabia, and Damascus, and Samaria:

10 Like as I took these in my hand, I will also take all the
- countries. Wail, ye graven images in Jerusalem and in Samaria:

11 For like as I did to Samaria and the works of her hands,
so also will I do to Jerusalem and her idols.

12 And it shall be, when the Lord hath made an end of doing
all things in the mount Zion and in Jerusalem, he shall turn (his
hand) against the mighty mind, against the ruler of the Assyrians,
and upon the uplifting of the glory of his eyes.

13 For he said, By my strength will I do it, and <by
wisdom of my prudence> will I remove the boundaries of
and will plunder their strength.

14 And I will Shake inhabited cities, and the whole world will
I seize with my hand like a nest, and like eggs that are left will
I take them up; and there is none that shall escape me, or can
gainsay me.

15 Shall an axe be glorified, apart from him that smiteth with
it? or shall a saw be uplifted, apart from him that driveth it?
as if one should lift a rod or staff, and not thus?

16 But the Lord of Hosts shall send dishonour upon thine
honour, and burning ﬁre shall burn against thy glory.

17 And-the light of Israel shall be as a ﬁre, and he shall
sanctify it in burning ﬁre, and shall devour the wood as grass,

18 In that day the mountains and the forests and the hills
shall be blotted out, and he shall devour them from the soul
to the ﬂesh; and he that ﬂeeth shall be as he that ﬂeeth from
burning ﬂame:

19 And they that are left from them shall be few, and a little
child shall write them.

20 And it shall be in that day, no longer shall the remnant
of Israel be added, and they that are saved of Jacob shall no
more put their trust in them that did them wrong, but they shall
put their trust in God, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.
2; And the remnant of Jacob shall be toward the mighty God.

22 And if the people of Israel become as the sand of the
sea, the remnant shall be saved; for (he is) fulfilling a word
and cutting it short in righteousness,

23 Because God shall perform a word (that is) cut short, in
the whole world.

24 Therefore thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Fear not, my
people, ye that dwell in Zion, because of the Assyrians; for
with a rod shall he smite thee; for I bring a stroke upon thee,
that thou mayest see the way of Egypt.

25 For yet a little, and the anger shall cease; but my wrath is
against their counsel.

26 And God shall stir (a stroke) against them, according
to the stroke of Midian, in a place of affliction; and his wrath
(shall be) at the way by the sea, toward the way by Egypt.

27 And it shall be in that day, the fear of him shall be taken
away from thee, and his yoke from 03 thy shoulder, and his yoke
shall be destroyed from off your shoulders.

28 For he shall come to the city of Aiath,

29 And shall pass over to Megiddo, and at Michmash shall
he set down his baggage; and he shall pass over a valley, and
shall come to Aiath; fear shall seize on Ramah, the city of Saul.

30 The daughter of Gallim shall ﬂee: one shall hear at 83, I
shall hear at Anathoth:

31 Madmenah shrank away, and the dwellers in Gebir.

32 Encourage her to day in the way to stay, encourage with
the hand the hill, the daughter of Zion, and ye hills that are in
Jerusalem.

33 For behold, the ruler, the Lord of Hosts, confoundeth the
glorious ones with might, and they that are uplifted in insolence
shall be crushed, and the uplifted ones shall be humbled

34 by the sword, and Lebanon with his uplifted ones shal
fall.

XI. 1 And there shall come forth a rod out of the root of
Jesse, and a blossom shall come up from his root.

2 And there shall rest upon him a spirit of God, a spirit of
wisdom and understanding, a spirit of counsel and might, a
spirit of knowledge and-of reverence;

3 A spirit of the fear of God shall ﬁll him; he shall not
judge according to the seeming, nor convict according to report,

4 But he shall judge judgment for the humble, and shall
convict the humble ones of the earth, and shall smite the earth
with the word of his mouth, and with the breath through his
lips shall he slay the impious man:

5 And he shall be girded with righteousness about his loins,
and bound with truth about ’his sides.

6 And the wolf shall graze with the lamb, and the leopard
shall rest with the kid, and the calf and the bull and the lion
shall graze together, and a little child shall lead them.

7 And the ox and the bear shall graze together, and their
young ones shall graze together, and they shall eat chaff together the lion and the ox.

8 And a young child shall lay his hand over the hole of asps,
and on the lair of the offspring of asps.

9 And they shall not do evil, neither shall they be able to
destroy any upon my holy mountain; for the whole (earth) is
ﬁlled with the knowledge of the Lord, as much water covereth
seas.

10 And in that day shall be the root of Jesse, and he that
standeth up to rule over nations; in him shall nations hope.
And his rest shall be honour.

11 And it shall be in that day, the Lord shall again show his
hand to be jealous for the remnant which is left of the people,
whatever be left from the Assyrians, and from Egypt, and Babylonia,
and Ethiopia, and from the Elamites, and from the rising
up of the sun, and from Arabia.

12 And he shall lift up a signal toward the nations, and shall
bring together them that are. perished of Israel, and them that
are scattered of Judah shall he bring together from the four
corners of the earth.

13 And the yoke of Ephraim shall be taken away, and the
enemies of Judah shall perish; Ephraim shall not envy Judah,
and Judah shall not afflict Ephraim.

14 And they shall ﬂy in ’ ships; they shall plunder
the sea together, and them from the rising of the sun, and Edom;
and upon Moab ﬁrst shall they lay their hands, and the children
of Ammon shall be ﬁrst to obey them.

15 And the Lord shall make the sea of Egypt desolate, and
shall lay his hand upon the river with a mighty wind, and shall
smite seven channels, so that he go over (dry) shod,

16 And there shall be a way for my people that are left in
Egypt; and it shall be to Israel as the day when he came out of
the land of Egypt.

XII. 1 And thou shalt in that day, I will praise thee,
Ο Lord, because thou wast angry with me, and didst turn away
thy wrath, and pitiedst me.

2 Behold, my God is my Saviour, I will trust in him, and
will not be afraid; for the Lord is my glory and my praise, and
he is become my salvation.

3 And ye shall draw water with joy out of the fountains of
salvation.

4 And thou shalt say in that day, Praise the Lord, cry his
name aloud, proclaim his glorious deeds among the nations;
make mention that his name is exalted.

5 Praise the name of the Lord, for he hath done exalted
deeds; proclaim this in all the earth.

6 Exult and rejoice, ye that dwell in Zion: for the Holy One
of Israel is exalted in the midst of thee.

XIII. 1 Vision which Isaiah the son of Amoz saw against
Bab lon.

2 Lift ye up a signal on a mountain in a plain, upraise your
voice to them, be] not afraid: encourage (them) in heart: open,
ye rulers.

3 Ι marshal them, even I; they are sanctified, and I lead
them; giants come to fulfil my wrath, rejoicing and proud
together.

4 Α voice of many nations upon the mountains, like (the
voice) of many nations; a voice of kings and of nations gathered
together. The Lord of Hosts hath commanded an armed nation

5 To come from aland afar off, from the uttermost foundation
of heaven, the Lord and his armed men, to destroy the whole
world.

6 Wail ye: ’the day of the Lord is near; and a destruction
shall come from God.

7 Therefore shall every hand he slackened, and every heart
of man shall be faint:

8 And the old men shall be confounded, and pangs as of a
travailing woman shall have hold of them; and they shall lament
one with another, and shall be amazed, and shall change their
face as doth a ﬂame.

9 For behold, the day of the Lord cometh, and there is no
healing of its wrath and anger, to make the earth desolate, and to,
destroy the sinners out of it.

10 For the stars of heaven, and Orion, and all the order of
’ heaven shall not give their light; and it shall grow dark when
the sun ariseth, and the mobn shall not give her light.

11 And I will command evils upon the whole world, even
their own sins upon the wicked: and I will destroy the pride of
transgressors, and will humble the pride of the arrogant;

12 And they that are left shall be more precious than new gold;
and the man shall be more precious than the stone from Ophir.

13 For the heaven shall be wroth, and the earth shall be
shaken from her foundations, because of the wrath of the anger
of the Lord of Hosts, in the day when his wrath cometh upon it.

14 And they that are left shall be as a roe that ﬂeeth, and as
a sheep that wandereth, and there shall be none that gathereth
them together, for each to return to his people; and each to haste
into his own land.

15 For whosoever is taken shall be overcome, and whosoever
are gathered together shall fall by the sword.

16 And they Shall dash their children down before their face,
and plunder their houses, and take possession of their wives.

17 Behold, I rouse up against you the Medes, who reckon
not silver, neither have they any need of gold.

18 They shall shatter the bows of the young men; and they
shall not have pity on your children, nor shall their eyes spare
your children.

19 And Babylon, which is called honourable by the king
of the Chaldeans, shall be, like as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah.

20 It shall not be inhabited for ever, nor shall they enter ’
it throughout many generations, nor shall the Arabians pass through
it, nor shall shepherds rest therein.

21 And wild beasts shall rest there, and houses shall be ﬁlled
with noise: and owls shall rest there, and demons shall dance
there.

22 And apes shall dwell there, and hedgehogs shall make their
nests in their houses. Quickly it comes, and will not linger.

XIV. 1 And the Lord shall have pity on Jacob, and will
yet choose out Israel, and they shall rest upon their own land;
and the stranger shall be added unto them, and shall be added
unto the house of Jacob.

2 And nations shall take them, and-bring them into their
place; and they shall make them to inherit it, and shall be
multiplied upon the land of God for bondmen and for bondwomen;
and they that did carry them into captivity shall be
captives, and they that were lords over them shall have them for
lords.

3 And it shall be in that day, God shall make thee to rest
from thy woe, and from thine indignation, and from thy hard
bondage with which thou servedst them.

4 And ’ shalt take up this lament upon the king of
Babylon, and say in that day, ’has the exactor ceased, and
the oppressor ceased!

5 God hath broken in pieces the yoke of the sinners, the yoke
of the rulers,

6 Smiting a nation in wrath, with a stroke that cannot be
healed; striking a nation a wrathful blow which ’spareth not, he
hath rested in confidence.

7 All the earth shouteth with joy,

8 And the trees of Lebanon rejoice over thee, and the cedar
of Lebanon, (saying,) Since thou hast lain down to sleep, there
hath not come up one that felleth us.

9 Hell from beneath is embittered on meeting thee; there
were roused up together for thee all the giants that did rule the
earth, that roused from their thrones all kings of the nations;

10 All shall answer and say to thee, Thou also art taken, as
we also were; and art reckoned among us.

11 But down to hell hath thy glory come, thy plentiful joy;
under thee shall they spread decay, and a worm is thy covering.

12 How is Lucifer, that riseth early, fallen out of heaven!
he is crushed into the earth, that sent forth unto all the nations.

13 But thou saidst in thy heart, Up to heaven ‘will I go, above
the stars of heaven will I set my throne; I will sit on a high
mountain, above the high’hills toward the north,

14 I will go up above the clouds, I will be like the most High.

15 But now shalt thou go down’into hell, and into the foundations
of the earth.

16 They that see thee shall marvel at thee, and say, This is
the man that tortureth the earth, shaking kings,

17 He that maketh the whole world desolate, <and his cities
hath he destroyed,> those in (his) train hath he not loosed;

18 All the kings of the nations have lain down to rest in
honour, each one in his own house:

19 But thou shalt be cast forth upon the mountains, like a
loathed corpse; with many dead, that are thrust through with
swords, that go down to Hell. Even as a cloke smeared with
blood shall not be clean,

20 Even so‘neither shalt thou be clean, because thou didst"
destroy my land, and didst slay my peOple; thou shalt not abide,
no, not for ever, an evil seed.

21 Make ready thy children to be slaughtered for the sins of:
thy father} that they may not rise up, and inherit the earth, and .
ﬁll the earth with wars.

22 And I will rise against them, saith the Lord of Hosts, and Α
will destroy their name, and remnant, and seed: thus saith the
Lord.

23 And I will make Babylon desolate, for hedgehogs to dwell
’ there; and it shall come to nought; and I will make it a <pit>
of mire, unto destruction.

24 Thus saith the Lord of Hosts: As I have spoken, so shall
it be, and as I have counselled, so shall it abide,

25 To destroy the Assyrians from my land, and from my
mountains; and they shall be trodden down, and their yoke
shall be stripped from off them, and their renown shall be
stripped from off their shoulders.

26 This is the counsel which the Lord hath counselled against
the whole world, and this (is) his hand, which is upraised against
all the nations of the world.

27 For what God, the Holy, has counselled, who shall scatter?
and his hand, that is upraised, who shall turn away?

28 In the year that the king Ahaz died came this word.

29 May ye not rejoice, all ye strangers, for that the yoke of
him that smote you is broken; for from ’ seed shall come
forth the offspring of asps, and their offspring shall come forth,
ﬂying serpents.

30 And through him shall beggars feed, and beggar men shall
rest in peace; but he shall destroy thy seed with famine, and thy,
remnant shall he destroy.

31 Wail, ye gates of cities; let cities that are confounded cry
out, all ye strangers: for from the north a smoke cometh, and
there is no means to continue.

32 And what shall the kings of the nations answer? That
the Lord hath founded Zion, and through him shall the humble
among the people be saved.

XV. 1 The Vision against the land of Moab. 
 By night shall the land of Moab perish, for by night shall the
wall of the land of Moab perish.

2 Grieve ye for yourselves; for Dibon also shall perish, where
your altar is; there shall ye go up to weep, upon Nebo of the
land of Moab. Wail: (let there be) baldness on every head, all
arms cut in pieces.

3 In her highways gird yourselves with sackcloth, and smite
yourselves on her housetops and in her highways and in her
streets; wail, ’of-you, with weeping.

4 For Heshbon hath cried aloud, and <Elealeh>; until
voice was heard; therefore the loins of the land of Moab cry out,
her heart shall learn.

5 The heart of the land of Moab crieth aloud within her unto
Zoar; for she is (as) a heifer of three years old; and on the
ascent of Luhith shall they go up weeping unto thee, by the way
of Horonaim; destruction crieth out, and an earthquake;

6 The water of Nimrim shall be desolate and the grass thereof
shall fail; for there shall be no green grass.

7 Is she like to be saved, even thus? for I will bring (the)
Arabians upon the valley, and they shall take it.

8 For the cry hath reached the mountain of the land of Moab,
Of Eglairn, and her wailing unto the well of Elim.

9 But the waters of Dimon shall be ﬁlled with blood; for I
’will bring (the) Arabians upon Dimon, and I will remove the
seed of Moab, and Ariel, and the remnant of Adamah.

XVI. 1 I will send as it were creeping things upon the earth:
is the mount of Zion a desolate rock?

2 For thou shalt be as a nestling taken away, when a bird
ﬂieth up, daughter of Moab: against thee, Amon, yet further

3 Take counsel, and make a shelter from trouble for thyself
continually; in midday darkness they ﬂee, they are amazed;
(see) lest thou be an exile.

4 The exiles shall sojourn <with thee> Moab; for they shall
be a shelter to you from the face of a pursuer; for thine alliance
is taken away, misery is fulfilled, and the ruler is perished that
did trample upon the earth.

5 And a throne shall be established with mercy, and he shall
sit upon it with truth in the tabernacle of David, judging, and
seeking out judgment, and hasting righteousness.

6 We have heard of the pride of Moab; very proud is he;
thou hast up his haughtiness. Not thus is thy prophesying,
not thus.

7 Moab shall wail; fOr in the land of Moab shall all wail;
thou shalt take care for them that dwell in Deseth, and shalt not
regard them.

8 The plains of Heshbon shall mourn, and the vine of Sibmah;
swallowing up the nations, tread ye down her vines, unto Jazer;
ye shall not reach, nor wander in the wilderness; they that
were sent forth were forsaken; for they crossed over the
desert.

9 Therefore will I weep as the weeping of Jazer, for the vine ’
of Sibmah; he cast down thy trees, Heshbon, and <Elealeh>;
upon thy harvest and thy vintage will I tread, and all shall fall.

10 And joy shall be removed, and exultation, from thy vineyards,
and in thy vineyards shall they not rejoice; and they shall
not tread wine into the vats, for it is ceased.

11 Therefore my belly shall sound as a harp upon Moab, and
’ mine inward-parts like a wall which thou didst newly build.

12 And it shall be, as to thy paying reverence, Moab is grown
weary at the altars, she shall also enter in unto the works of
hands so as to. pray, and shall not be able to deliver him.

13 This (is) the word that the Lord spake concerning Moab,
what time he also spake.

14 And now I say, Within three years, of the years of a hireling,
shall the glory of Moab be dishonoured with all (his) much
wealth, and shall be left very small and not honourable.

XVII. 1 The word against Damascus. 
 Behold, Damascus shall be removed from (among) cities, and
shall become a ruin,

2 Deserted for ever, for a place for ﬂocks to lie down and herds
to rest, and there shall be none that chaseth them.

3 And no longer shall it be strong, for Ephraim to take refuge;
and no longer there be a kingdom in Damascus, and the
remnant of the Syrians: for thou art not better than the sons
of Israel, and their glory.

4 Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, There shall be in that day
a failing of the glory of Jacob, and the fat things of his glory
shall be shaken.

5 And it shall be like as if one gather a standing harvest, and
reap the seed of ears of corn with his arm; and it shall be like as
if one gather an ear of corn in a barren valley,

6 And there be left in it a stalk, or as it were olive berries,
two or three on high in the air, or four or ﬁve upon the branches
thereof. Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel.

7 In that day shall a man trust in him that made him, and his
eyes shall look unto the Holy One of Israel.

8 And they shall not trust in their altars, nor in the works of
their hands, which their ﬁngers made; and they shall not look
upon their groves, nor their abominations.

9 In that day shall thy cities be abandoned, like as the Amorites
and the Hivites abandoned them from before the children of
Israel; and they shall be desolate.

10 Because thou didst abandon God thy Saviour, and τε·
memberedst not the Lord thy helper. Therefore shalt thou plant
an unfaithful plant, and an unfaithful seed.

11 But in the day when thou plantest it, thou shalt wander;
and in the morning if thou sowest, it shall blossom to harvest, in
whatsoever day thou shalt obtain it; and like a ’s father, thou
shalt obtain it for (thy) sons.

12 Woe, the multitude of many nations: as a billowy sea, so
shall ye be confounded, and the surface of many nations shall
sound as water

13 As much water are many nations, as when much water is
violently borne along; and he shall cast him off, and pursue him
afar, as the dust Of chaff when men winnow before the wind, and
like a whirlwind carrying along a circling dust cloud. I

14 Toward evening there shall be trouble: before morning,
and he shall not be; this is the portion of them that plundered
you, and the share for them that shared you.

XVIII. 1 Ah, the wings of the ships of the land, beyond
the rivers of Ethiopia;

2 He that sendeth forth hostages upon the sea, and letters on
papyrus above the water. For swift messengers shall go to a
nation that is high, and a stranger people and a cruel; (what is
beyond it?) a nation not looked for, and trodden down. Now ’
(as for) the rivers of the land

3 All of them, like as an inhabited land shall their land be
inhabited; like as if a signal were raised from a mountain, like
the voice of a trumpet shall it be heard.

4 For thus said the Lord to me, There shall be safety in my
city as the light of midday heat, and as a cloud of dew in a day
of harvest shall it be.

5 Before the harvest, when the blossom is perfect, and the sour ’
grape hath put forth its blossom; then shall he take away the
little clusters with pruning hooks, and shall take away the sprigs and cut them off.

6 And shall leave them together for the fowls of the heaven
and the beasts of the earth ; and the fogls of the heaven shall be
gathered together unto them, and all the beasts of the earth shall
come unto him.

7 At that time shall presents be brought to the Lord of Hosts
from a people crushed and torn, and from a people great from
henceforth and for ever; (it is) a nation hoping, and trodden
down, which is in the portion of the river of its land : to the place
where is the name of the Lord of Hosts, the mount Zion.

1 Behold, the Lord sitteth upon a swift cloud, and shall
come to Egypt, and the works of ’s hands shall be shaken
from before him, and their hearts shall be discomfited within
them.

2 And Egyptians shall rise up against Egyptians, and shall war
each against his brother and each against his neighbour, and city
shall rise up against city, and province against province.

3 And the spirit of the Egyptians shall be confounded within
them, and I will scatter their counsel, and they shall inquire of
their gods and their images, and of them that speak from the
earth, and of the ventriloquists, and the diviners.

4 And I will give Egypt over into the hands of men, harsh
lords; and harsh kings shall lord it over them. Thus saith the
Lord of Hosts.

5 And the Egyptians shall drink the water that is. beside the
sea, and the river shall fail, and be dried up.

6 And the rivers and the trenches of the river shall fail, and
every gathering together of water shall be dried up, and (the water)
in every marsh of reed and rush,

7 And the green meadow-grass, all that is round about the
river, and all that which is sown about the river, shall be dried up,
blasted by the wind.

8 And the ﬁshers shall mourn, and all they that cast hook into
the river shall mourn, and they that cast nets, and the ﬁshermen
shall grieve.

9 And shame shall seize on them that work the carded ﬂax, and
them that work the linen.

10 And they that <weave> them shall be in pain, and
that make strong drink shall be. grieved, and shall afflict their
souls,

11 And the rulers of Tanis shall be fools; the wise counsellors
of the king, their counsel shall be turned to foolishness. How
will ye say to the king, We are sons of men of understanding, sons
of kings which were from the beginning?

12 Where are now thy wise men? let them even proclaim to
thee, and let them tell, what the Lord of Hosts hath purposed
upon Egypt.

13 rulers of Tanis have failed, and the rulers of
are uplifted: and they shall make Egypt to wander in her
tribes.

14 For the Lord hath mingled for them a spirit of wandering, and
they have made Egypt to wander in all their works, as wandereth
the drunken man, and he that vomiteth, together.

15 And there shall be no work for the Egyptians which shall
make head or tail, beginning or end.

16 But in that day shall the Egyptians be like women, in fear
and trembling, before the face of the hand of the Lord of Hosts,
which he shall lay upon them.

17 And the land of the men of Judah shall be a (cause of)
terror to the Egyptians; everyone, whosoever maketh mention of
it to them, they shall be afraid, because of the counsel of the Lord
of Hosts, which the Lord hath counselled against it.

18 In that day shall there be ﬁve cities in Egypt speaking in the
language of Canaan, and swearing in the name of the Lord; the
one city shall be called, City of Asedek.

19 In that day shall there be the altar to the Lord in the
Egyptians’ land, and a pillar at its boundary to the

20 And it shall be for a sign for ever to the Lord in the land of
Egypt; for they shall cry unto the Lord because of them that
oppress them, and the Lord shall send them a man, who shall save
them: he shall judge and save them.

21 And the Lord shall be known to the Egyptians; and the
Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall offer sacrifices
and shall make vows to the Lord, and render them.

22 And the Lord shall smite the Egyptians with a great stroke,
and heal them with a healing; and they shall turn unto the Lord,
and he shall hear them, and shall heal them.

23 In that day shall there be a way from Egypt to the
Assyrians, and the Assyrians shall enter into Egypt; and the
Egyptians shall go unto the Assyrians, and the Egyptians shall
serve the Assyrians.

24 In that day shall Israel be a third among the Assyrians and
among the Egyptians, blessed in the land

25 Which the Lord of Hosts (hath) blessed, saying, Blessed is
my people that is in Egypt and among the Assyrians, and. the
land of mine inheritance, Israel.

XX. 1 In the year when Tartan came to Azotus, when he
was sent by Sargon king of the Assyrians, and warred against
Azotus and. took it,

2 Then spake the LORD to Isaiah, saying, Go, and take off the
sackcloth from thy loins, and loose thy shoes from thy feet, and so
do, walking naked and barefoot.

3 And the, Lord said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked
naked and barefoot, three years there shall be signs and wonders
to the Egyptians and Ethiopians.

4 For thus shall the king of the Assyrians lead away the captivity
of Egypt and of the Ethiopians, young men and old men, naked
and barefoot, uncovered, the shame of Egypt.

5 And the Egyptians shall be ashamed and discomfited concerning
the Ethiopians, upon whom the Egyptians had trusted,
who were their glory.

6 And they that dwell in this isle shall say, Behold, we had
trusted to ﬂee unto them for help, who could not be saved from
the king of the Assyrians; and how shall we be saved?

XXI. 1 The vision of the desert. 
 As a tempest passeth through the desert, coming from a desert,
from the land. Fearful

2 Is the vision, and hard, that was proclaimed to me. He that
setteth at nought doth set at nought, and he that transgresseth
doth transgress. 
 The Elamites are upon me, and the envoys of the Persians
are coming against me. Now will I mourn, and will comfort
myself.

3 Therefore are my loins ﬁlled with faintness, and pangs have
taken hold of me, as her that travaileth- ; I did wrong, so as not to
hear, I laboured earnestly so ’ not to see.

4 My heart wandereth, and my transgression overwhelmeth me;
my soul turneth to fear.

5 Prepare the table, eat, drink ; stand up, ye rulers, and prepare
shields.

6 For thus saith the Lord to me, Go, set thee a watchman, and
whatsoever thou seest, tell it.

7 And I saw two mounted horsemen, one mounted on an ass,
and one mounted on a camel. Hear with diligent hearing,

8 And call Uriah to the watch tower of the Lord. And he
said, I have stood continually by day, and over the camp I stood
the whole night,

9 And behold, he himself cometh, mounted on a two-horse
chariot. And he answered and said, Babylon is fallen: and all her
images and the works of her hands are crushed into the earth.

10 Hear, ye that are left, and are in anguish, hear what I have
heard from the Lord of Hosts: the God of Israel hath proclaimed
it to us.

11 To me ye call from Seir, Watch ye (the) battlements.

17 And the remnant of the bows of the strong sons of Kedar
shall be few; for the Lord, the God of Israel, hath spoken it.

1 What hath befallen thee now, that ye are all gone up to vain
houses ?

2 The city is ﬁlled with men shouting; thy smitten ones are not
smitten with the sword, nor thy dead men dead in war.

3 All thy rulers are ﬂed; and they that are taken have been
cruelly bound, and the strong ones in thee are ﬂed far away.

4 Therefore I said, Let me go, I will weep bitterly; persist not
to comfort me, for the blow of the daughter of my race.

5 For it is a day of confusion and destruction, and of trampling
down, and a wandering from the Lord of Hosts; in the valley of
Zion they wander, from small to great they wander (on) to the
mountains.

6 And the Elamites took quivers; mounted men upon horses,
and a gathering of an array.

7 And there shall be thy chosen valleys, they shall be ﬁlled with
chariots, and the horsemen shall bar thy gates :

8 And they shall lay open the gates of Judah; and they shall
look in that day unto the chosen houses of the city.

9 And they shall lay open the secret things of the houses of
the citadel of David. And they saw that they were more in
number, and that they had turned off the water of the old pool
into the city,

10 And that they had pulled down the houses of Jerusalem for
a fortification of the wall for the city.

11 And ye made for yourselves a (pool of) water between the
two walls, further inward than the old pool ; and ye looked not to
him who made it from the beginning, and ye saw not him that

12 And the Lord of Hosts called it in that day weeping, and
beating of the breast, and shaving of the head, and girding with

13 But they on their part made merriment and exultation, slaying
oxen and slaughtering sheep, so as to eat ﬂesh and drink wine,
saying, Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.

14 And this is revealed in the ears of the Lord of Hosts, that
this sin shall not be forgiven you until ye die.

15 Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Go into the temple-chamber,
unto Shebna the <treasurer> and say to

16 What dost thou here, and what hast thou to do here, that
thou hast. hewn for thyself here a monument, and made for thyself
a monument on high, and graven an habitation for thyself in a rock?

17 Behold now, the Lord of Hosts will cast out and will
root out a man, and will take away thy robe, and thy crown
of glory, 18 And shall hurl thee into a land, great without measure,
and there shalt thou die; and shall turn thy ﬁne chariot to disgrace,
and the house of thy ruler to be trodden down,

19 And thou shalt be taken from thy stewardship, and from
thy state.

20 And. it shall be in that day, (that) I will call my servant
Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah;

21 And I will put on him thy robe, and thy crown will I
give him, and thy power; and thy stewardship will I give into
his halnds; and he shall be as a father to them that dwell in
Jerusalem.

22 And I will give the glory of David unto him, and he shall
rule, and there shall be none that gainsayeth him ; [and I will lay
the key of the house of David upon his shoulder, and he shall
open, and there shall be none that shall shut; and he shall shut,
and there shall be none that openeth]

23 And I will set him as a ruler in a sure place, and he shall be
for a throne of glory of his father's

24 And upon him shall every one trust, that is honourable in
his father's house, from small to great, and they shall be
upon him

25 In that day. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts: The man that
is ﬁrmly ﬁxed in a sure place shall be shaken, and shall fall, and
the glory that is upon him shall be taken away, for the Lord hath
spoken it.

XXIII. The vision of Tyre. 
 1 Wail, ye ships of Carthage, for (she) is perished, and they no
longer come from the land of Chittim; she is led captive. 
 2 To whom are they become like, that dwell in the isle?
traffickers of Phoenicia, crossing the sea, 
 3 On great waters, a seed of traffickers; as when a harvest is
gathered in, (are) the traffickers of the nations. 
 4 Be thou ashamed, O Zidon, saith the sea; and the strength
of the sea saith, I travailed not, nor have I brought forth, non
nourished young men, nor raised up virgins. 
 5 But when it shall become known in Egypt, anguish shall take
hold of them concerning Tyre. 
 6 Depart unto Carthage: wail, ye that dwell in this isle. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 7 Was not this your pride which was from the beginning, before
she was delivered up? 
 8 Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre? is she weaker, or
hath she no. strength? her merchants were honourable, rulers of
the earth 
 9 The Lord of Hosts hath counselled to undo the pride of the
honourable ones, and to disgrace all that is honourable upon the 
 10 Till thine own land : for indeed no longer come there ships
from Carthage. 
 11 But thine hand is no longer strong by sea, thou that didst
provoke kings: the Lord of Hosts hath commanded concerning
Canaan, to destroy her strength. 
 12 And they shall say, No longer shall ye any more insult and
injure the daughter of Zion ; and if thou depart to Chittim, neither
there shalt thou have rest ; 
 13 Or to the land of the Chaldaeans: that also is made desolate
by the Assyrians: [neither there shalt thou have rest, for] the wall
thereof is fallen. 
 14 Wail, ye ships of Carthage, for your stronghold is perished. 
 15 And it shall be in that day, Tyre shall be abandoned
seventy years, as is the time of a king, as the time of a man;
and it shall be after seventy <years> Tyre shall be as the
of a harlot. 
 16 Take a harp, rove about, thou harlot city that art forgotten;
play sweetly, sing much, that there may be remembrance of thee.
And it shall after seventy years, God shall make a visitation of
Tyre, and she shall turn again to her ancient way, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 17 And shall be a port of merchandise for all the kingdoms of
the world. 
 18 And her merchandise, and her hire, shall be holy to the
’ Lord: it shall not ’ gathered together for them, but for those
that dwell before the Lord; all her merchandise, to eat, and to
drink, and to be ﬁlled, and for a contribution, as a memorial
< before the

XXIV. 1 Behold, the Lord destroyeth the world, and will
lay it desolate, and will uncover the face thereof, and scatter the
inhabitants thereof. 
 2 And the people shall be as the priest, and the servant
as the lord, and the maid as the lady; the buyer shall be as
the seller, the lender as the borrower, and the debtor as he to
whom he oweth. 
 3 The earth shall be utterly destroyed, and the earth shall be
utterly spoiled; for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken this. ’ 
 4 The earth mourneth, and the world is destroyed; and the
exalted ones of the earth do mourn. 
 5 And the earth transgresseth because of her inhabitants: be:
cause they have overstepped (the) law, and changed the ordinances
of the Lord, an everlasting covenant. 
 6 Therefore shall a curse devour the earth, because the inhabit-
ants of it have sinned ; therefore shall they that dwell in the earth
be poor, and few men shall be left. 
 7 The wine shall mourn, the vine shall mourn, all that are
joyful in heart shall groan. 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 Ceased is the joy of tabrets, ceased is the arrogance and
wealth of the wicked, ceased the voice of the harp. 
 9 They are ashamed, they drink not wine; the strong drink
becometh bitter to them that drink. 
 10 Every city is made desolate; it shall shut up the house,
that none come in. 
 11 Wail, for the wine, everywhere; ceased is all joy of the
land, 
 12 And cities shall be left desolate, and houses left therein
shall perish. 
 13 All this shall be in the land, in the midst of the nations;
like as if one gleaneth an olive tree, so shall they glean them;
and (as) if the vintage have ceased. 
 14 These shall cry aloud with their voice, but they that are left
upon the earth, shall rejoice together with the glory of the Lord,
the water of the sea shall be troubled 
 15 Therefore the glory of the Lord shall be in the isles of the
sea, the name of the Lord shall be glorious. 
 16 O Lord God ’Israel, from the corners of the earth have
we heard wonders, Hope (is) for the righteous. And they shall
say, Woe to them that set at nought; as for. them that set at
nought the law, 
 17 Fear, and a pit, and a snare, are upon you that dwell upon
the earth. 
 18 And it shall be, he that ﬂeeth from the fear shall fall into
the pit; and he that cometh out from the pit shall be caught by
the snare; for windows are opened out of heaven, and the foundations
of the earth shall be shaken. 
 19 The earth shall be clean confounded, and the dearth shall be
utterly helpless. 
 
 
 

 
 20 The earth tottereth and shall be shaken, like a but, like him
that is drunken and reeling; and shall fall, and shall not be able
to rise again, for her transgression is strong upon her. 
 21 And God shall bring his hand against the array of heaven,
and against the kings of the earth. 
 22 And they shall gather them together, and shut them into a
fastness, and into a prison ; after many generations shall there be
a visitation of them. 
 23 And the brick shall decay, and the wall shall fall; for the
Lord shall reign in Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before the elders ’
shall he be glorified

XXV. A Song. 
 1 O Lord my God, I will glorify thee, I will praise thy name;
for thou hast done wonderful things, a counsel ancient and true.
Amen, O Lord. ’ 
 2 For thou hast laid cities in a dust heap, strong cities, that
their foundations should fall; the city of the wicked shall not be
built, for ever. 
 3 Therefore shall the people that is poor praise thee, and cities
of men that suffer wrong shall bless thee. 
 4 For thou art become a helper to every humble city, and
a shelter to them that despair, for want ; from evil men shalt thou
rescue them—a shelter for the thirsty, and a breath of men
suffer wrong [shall bless thee], 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 As men faint hearted, thirsting in Zion,—from wicked
to whom thou gavest us over. 
 6 And the Lord of hosts shall do (it) for all the nations;
upon this mountain shall they drink gladness, they shall drink
wine 
 7 They shall anoint themselves with myrrh in this mountain.
Give over all this to the nations; for this counsel is against all the
nations. 
 8 Death was strong, and swallowed them up; and again God
hath taken away every tear from every face; he hath taken away
the shame of the people from all the earth, for the mouth of the
Lord hath spoken. 
 9 And they shall say in that day, Behold our God, in whom
we ever hoped; and we were triumphant, and will rejoice in our
salvation. 
 10 For God will give us rest upon this mountain, and the land
of Moab shall be trodden down, like as they tread a threshing
ﬂoor in wagons. 
 11 And he will let go his hands, like as he himself also humbled
him to destroy him; and he shall humble his pride, whereto he
laid his hands. 
 12 And the height of the refuge of thy wall shall be humble,
and it shall come down, even unto the ground.

XXVI. A Song. 
 1 In that day shall they sing this song over the land of Judah ;
saying, Behold, a strong city; and he shall set salvation for us
for the wall and the outer, wall. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 Open ye the gates, let a people enter which keepeth righteousness
and keepeth truth, 
 3 Laying hold of and keeping peace. For in
thee 
 4 They have hoped, for ever, O Lord, the great, the ever
lasting God, 
 5. Who didst humble and bring down them that dwelt in high
places; strong cities shalt thou throw down, and bring down
to the ground, 
 6 And the feet of the gentle and humble shall tread upon
them. 
 7 The way of the godly is become straight; and the way of
the godly (is) prepared. 
 8 For the way of the Lord is judgment; we have hoped in
thy name, and in the remembrance, 
 9 Which our soul longeth for. [A Song] Out of the night
doth my spirit rise early toward thee, O God, because thy
commandments are a light upon the earth. Learn righteousness,
ye that dwell on the earth, 
 10 For ceased is the ungodly; he will not learn righteousness
upon the. earth, he will not perform truth; let the wicked be
removed, that he may not see the glory of the Lord. 
 11 Lord, thy arm is uplifted, and they knew it not; but when
they learn it, they shall be ashamed; jealousy shall take hold of
a people that is untaught, and now shall ﬁre devour the
enemies. 
 12 Lord, our God, grant peace to us, for all things dost thou
give us. 
 13 Lord, our God, take us for thine own; O Lord, beside.
thee we know none other, thy name do we name. 
 
 
 
 

 
 14 But the dead shall not see life, neither shall physicians
raise them up; for this cause didst thou bring them in, and
destroyedst them, and removedst all that was male among them. 
 15 Add unto them evils, O Lord, add evils to all the glorious
ones of the earth. 
 16 Lord, in affliction I remembered thee, in slight affliction
(was) thy correction upon us. 
 17 And as she who travaileth draweth near to bring forth, and
crieth out in her travail, so were we before thy beloved. 
 18 For the fear of thee, O Lord, did we conceive, and
travailed, and brought forth; we made a breath of thy salvation
upon the earth, but they that dwell upon the earth shall fall. 
 19 For the dead shall arise, and they that are in the tombs
shall be roused up, and they that are in the earth shall rejoice;
for the dew that cometh from thee is healing to them, but the
land of the ungodly shall fall. 
 20 Go, my people, enter into thy chambers, shut thy door,
hide thyself ever so little a while, until the wrath of the Lord be
passed by. 
 21 For behold, the Lord from his holy (place) bringeth his
anger upon them that dwell upon-the earth; and the earth shall
reveal her <blood>, and the earth shall not cover up the

XXVII. 1 In that day shall God bring his sword, the holy,
and great, and strong, against the dragon, the serpent that ﬂeeth,
against the dragon, the crooked serpent, and shall slay the
dragon. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 In that day (shall there be) a fair vineyard; (there is) a
desire to begin (a song) upon her. 
 3 I am a strong city, a city besieged; in vain shall I water
it; for it shall be taken by night, but by day shall the wall fall. 
 4 There is none but she laid hold upon her; who shall set
me to guard a reed in a ﬁeld? because of this enemy's
have I set her at nought. Therefore for this cause bath the Lord
God done all things that he appointed. I am burnt up, 
 5 They that dwell in her shall cry: Let us make peace with
him, let us make peace. 
 6 They that come, the children of Jacob shall bud, and Israel
shall blossom, and the world shall be ﬁlled with the fruit. 
 7 Shall it be that, as he himself smote, he also shall be
stricken; and as himself slew, so he shall be slain? 
 8 Fighting and reproaching, he shall send them forth: wast
thou not he that devised, with thy harsh spirit, to slay them with
a spirit of wrath? 
 9 Therefore shall the transgression of Jacob be taken away,
and this is his blessing, when I have taken away his sin, when
I have laid all the stones of the altars in fragments, as light
dust; and their trees shall not remain, and their idols, destroyed
as a forest (reaching) far. 
 10 The fold that is inhabited shall be left deserted, like an
abandoned fold; and it shall be a feeding place for long time,
and there shall they rest. 
 11 And after a time there shall not be in her any green thing,
because of its drying up. Ye women that come from a spectacle,
come hither; for it is not a people that hath understanding;
therefore he that made them shall not pity, nor shall he that
formed them have mercy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 12 And it shall be in that day, the Lord shall fence them in
from the channel of the river unto Rhinocolura ; and ye, gather
together one by one the children of Israel. 
 13 And it shall be in that day, they shall blow with the great
trumpet, and they shall come, <that perished> in the land of the
Assyrians. and they that perished in Egypt, and shall (come to)
worship the Lord at the holy mountain in Jerusalem.

XXVIII. 1 Ah, for the crown of pride; (it is) the hirelings
of Ephraim, the flower that falleth from the glory upon the crest
of ’the fat mountain, they that are drunken without wine. 
 2 Behold, a mighty and a hard thing is the wrath of the Lord,
like a hailstorm rushing dbwn without shelter, rushing down with
force; like a great body of water sweeping a land, it shall cause
rest to the land: with hands 
 3 And with feet shall the crown of pride be trampled down,
the hirelings of Ephraim. 
 4 And the ﬂower, that falleth from the hope of glory, shall be
upon the top of the high mountain; like an early fruit of the
ﬁg, he that seeth it, before he take it into his hand, shall desire
to swallow it up. 
 5 In that day shall the Lord of Hosts be the crown of hope
that is woven of the glory for him that is left of my— 
 6 And they shall be left,—for a spirit of judgment, for
and for might, forbidding to destroy. 
 7 For these are gone astray by reason of wine; they went
astray because of the strong drink, priest and prophet left the
way because of wine, they were disturbed from their revelling
in strong drink, they went astray. This is a vision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 A curse shall devour this counsel; for this counsel is for
greedicness´ 
 9 To whom did we declare evils, and to whom did we declare
a message? it is they who are weaned from milk, they who are
withdrawn from the breast. 
 10 Expect thou affliction upon affliction, hope upon hope, yet
a little, yet a little, 
 11 Because of contempt of the lips, through another tongue;
for they shall speak, to this people, 
 12 Saying unto it, This (is) the rest for the hungry, and this
(is) the datruction ; and they would not hear. 
 13 And the oracle of the Lord God shall be unto them
affliction upon affliction, hope upon hope, yet a little, yet a little,
that they may go, and fall backward; and they shall venture, and
be destroyed, and be taken. 
 14 Therefore hear the word of the Lord, ye afflicted men, and
rulers of this people, that is in Jerusalem. 
 15 Because ye say, We have made a covenant with hell, and
agreements with death; if a rushing tempest pass by, it shall
not come upon us ; we have set falsehood for our hope, and by
falsehood will we be sheltered: 
 16 Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will Set in the
foundations of Zion a stone, very precious, chosen out, a chief
corner stone, honourable ; in her foundations (I set it), and he
who believeth thereon shall not be ashamed. ’ 
 17 And I will set judgment for a hope, and my mercy shall
be for balances; and ye who vainly trust in a lie—for the
shall not pass you by, 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 18 Lest also it take away your covenant of death, and your
hope regarding hell shall not abide: if a rushing tempest come
upon you, ye shall be trodden down by it. 
 19 When it passeth by, it shall take hold upon you; very
early shall it pass by by day, and by night it shall be an evil
hope. Learn to hearken, 
 20 Being straitened; we cannot ﬁght, and of ourselves we are
weak, to be assembled together. 
 21 As (at) the mount of ungodly men shall he stand up, and
it shall be, in the valley of Gibeon, with wrath shall he do his
works, a work of bitterness; but his wrath shall deal strangely,
and its bitterness shall be strange. 
 22 And ye, may ye not rejoice, and let not your bonds be
strong; for I have heard from the Lord of Hosts of doings,
fulfilled and cut short, which he will perform upon all the land. 
 23 Give ear, and hearken to my voice; attend, and hear my
words. ’ 
 24 Will the ploughman plough all the day P or will he prepare
the sowing before he have tilled the land? 
 25 And, when he hath levelled the face of it, ﬁrst he soweth
small fennel and cummin, and again wheat, and barley, and spelt
in thy borders. 
 26 And thou shalt be instructed by the judgment of thy God,
and shalt rejoice. 
 27 For the fennel is not winnowedlwith harshness, nor will
he drive a cart wheel round upon the cummin ; but the fennel is
shaken with a rod, and the cummin 
 28 Shall be eaten with bread. For not for ever will I be
angered with you, neither shall the voice of my bitterness trample
you down. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 29 And these wonders are come forth from the Lord of Hosts:
take counsel, lift up a vain appeal.

XXIX. 1 Ah, city of Ariel, against which David made
war; collect fruits year after year: for ye shall eat with Moab. 
 2 For I will afﬂict Ariel, and her strength and her wealth shall
be mine. 
 3 And I will make a circle like David against thee, and will
set up a palisade around thee, and will plant towers against thee, 
 4 And thy wOrds shall be brought low unto the earth, and thy
words shall sink into the earth; and thy voice shall be as they
that speak from the earth, and close to the ground shall thy
voice be weak. 
 5 And like a dust cloud from a wheel shall the wealth of the
ungodly be, and like chaff borne along; and it shall be like a
moment, suddenly, 
 6 From the Lord of Hosts; for there shall be a viSitation
with crying aloud and earthquake; and with a great voice, a rush-
ing tempest and a ﬂame of ﬁre devouring. 
 7 And as he that dreameth a dream shall be the wealth of
all the nations that did march against Israel, and all they that
marched against Jerusalem, and all that were gathered together
against her and afﬂicted her. 
 8 And they shall be like them that in sleep drink and eat, and
when they arise, their dream is vain ; and like as he that is thirsty
dreameth, as he that drinketh, and when he ariseth, he still
thirsteth, and his soul hath hoped after an empty thing; so shall
the wealth be of all the nations, as many as did march against
Jerusalem, and against the mount Zion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 9 Faint ye, and fall away, and stagger drunkenly, not with
strong drink, nor with wine. 
 10 For the Lord hath given you to drink with a spirit of
slumber, and will close their eyes, and their ’ and their
’ eyes; they it is that see the hidden things. 
 11 And all these words shall be as the sayings of this book
that is sealed, and if they give it to a man that knoweth letters,
saying, Read these; then he shall say, I cannot read, for it is sealed. 
 12 And this book shall be given into the hands of a man such
as knoweth not letters, and one shall say to him, Read this; and
he shall say, I know not letters. 
 13 And the Lord said, This people draweth near me, with
their lips they honour me, but their heart is far from me; but in
vain do they worship me, teaching the commandments of men,
and doctrines. 
 14 Therefore behold, I will proceed further to change this
people; and I will change them, and will destroy the wisdom of
the wise, and the prudence of the prudent will I hide. 
 15 Ah, they that take counsel deeply, and not through the
Lord; ah, they that take counsel in secret, and their works shall
be in darkness, and they shall say, Who hath seen us? and who
shall ﬁnd us out, or what we do? 
 16 Shall ye not be reckoned as the ’s clay? Shall the
thing formed say to him that formed (it), Thou didst not form
’ or the thing made to him that made it, Thou didst not
make me with understanding? 
 17 Is it not yet a little while, and Lebanon shall be changed
(to be) as mount Carmel, and mount Carmel shall be reckoned
’ for a forest? 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 18 And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of a book,
and they that are in the darkness, and that are in the mist, the
eyes of the blind shall see. 
 19 And the poor shall exult because of the Lord, and they
that were despaired for among men shall be ﬁlled with joy. 
 20 The transgressor hath failed, and the overweening man is
perished, and they that transgressed for evil doing are utterly
destroyed, 
 21 And they that cause men to err in a word; and all them
that convince in the gates shall they set as a stuniblingblock, and
. they turned aside the just among the unjust. 
 22 Therefore thus saith the Lord upon the house of Jacob,
which he separated from (among) Abraham, Jacob shall not now
. be ashamed, nor Israel now change his face: 
 23 But when they see their children, my works, they shall
sanctify my name because of me, and sanctify the Holy One of
Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. 
 24 And, they that wander in spirit shall learn prudence, but
they that murmur shall learn to hearken, and the stammering
tongue shall learn to speak peace.

XXX. 1 Ah, rebel children, thus saith the Lord: ye took
counsel, and not through me, and made agreements, not through
my spirit, to add sins upon sins: 
 2 They that walk to go down into Egypt, but they asked not
me; that they might be helped by Pharaoh, and sheltered by the
Egyptians. 
 3 For Pharaoh shall be your shelter to your shame, and to
· them that trust in Egypt a reproach. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 4 For there are in Tanis Chieftains, evil messengers: 
 5 In vain shall they weary themselves with a people that shall
not profit them, neither for help nor for profit, but for shame
and reproach. 
 6 The vision of the fourfooted beasts that are in the wilderness.
Amid the affliction and the straitening, a lion, and a lion's
whelp: thence also serpents, and the offspring of ﬂying serpents;
men who brought their wealth upon asses and camels to a
nation which shall not profit them [for help, but for shame and
reproach]. 
 7 The Egyptians will profit you in vain and emptily; declare
to them, This your consolation is vain. 
 8 Now therefore sit and write this upon a tablet, and in
a book, that these things shallbe for days of times and even
for ever. 
 9 For it is a disobedient people, lying sons, who were not
willing to hear the law of God, 
 10 They which say unto the prophets, Declare not unto us,
and to them that see visions, Talk not unto.us...but talk to us
and declare unto us another beguiling, 
 11 And turn us away from this way; take away from us this
path, and take away from us the oracle of Israel. 
 12 Therefore thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel,
Because ye were disobedient to these words, and hoped in
a lie, and because thou didst murmur, and trusted in this
wor 
 13 Therefore this sin ’shall be to you like a suddenly falling
wall of a city that hath been taken, whereof the ruin cometh
suddenly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 14 And the ruin of it shall be as the breaking of an earthen
vessel, a small piece of a jar, so that one cannot ﬁnd among
them a sherd wherein thou canst take up ﬁre, or wherein thou
canst <take away> canst a little water. 
 15 Thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, When thou
shalt turn and lament, then shalt thou be saved, and learn where
thou wast (placed): when thou hadst thy trust in vanities, your
strength became vain: and ye would not hear. 
 16, But ’. said, We will ﬂee upon horses; therefore shall ye
ﬂee: and ye said, We will be mounted on swift (ones); therefore
shall they that pursue you be swift. 
 17 And a thousand shall ﬂee because of the voice of one: and
because of the voice of ﬁve shall many ﬂee; until ye be left as
a mast upon a mountain, and as (one) bearing a standard upon
a hill. 
 18 And again will God wait, that he may pity you, and for this
cause will he be exalted, that he may have mercy on you, because
the Lord your God is a judge; and where will ye leave your
glory? Blessed are all they that wait upon him. 
 19 For a holy people shall dwell in Zion; and Jerusalem
wept sore, Have mercy on me: and he will have mercy on the
voice of thy cry ; when he saw, he hearkened unto thee. 
 20 And the Lord shall give to you bread of affliction, and
’ ’ scant water; and no longer shall they that beguile thee draw near
to thee; for thine eyes shall see them that beguile thee, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 21 And thine ears shall hear the words of the beguilers behind
thee; it is they who say, This is the way, let us walk in it, whether
to the right hand or to the left. 
 22 And thou shalt remove the idols, overlaid with silver and
with gold; thou shalt make them small, and shalt scatter them
away as the water of her that sitteth apart, and as dung shalt thou
remove them. 
 23 Then shall the rain be upon the seed of thy land, and the
bread of the increase of thy land shall be plenteousness, and shall
be fat; and thy cattle shall feed in that day in a rich place and a
large. 
 24 Your bulls, and your oxen that plough the land, shall eat
bran prepared for them winnowed with barley. 
 25 And there shall be, upon every high mountain, and upon
every lofty hill, ﬂowing water in that day, when many perish, and
when towers fall. 
 26 And the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun,
and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, in the day when the
Lord healeth the breaking of his ’peOple, and shall heal the pain
of thy wound. 
 27 Behold, the name of the Lord cometh after long time,
burning is his wrath; with glory is the oracle of his lips, his
oracle is full of wrath, and the wrath of his anger shall devour like
fire 
 28 And his breath, like water sweeping in a torrent-bed, shall
come even to the neck, and shall be divided, to confuse nations,
in vain error; and vain error shall pursue them, and shall lay
hold on them, face to face. 
 29 Ought ye to rejoice continually, and to enter continually
into my holy places as though feasting, and to. enter in as though
in joy, with the pipe, into the house of the Lord, to the God of
Israel? 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 30 And God shall make the glory of his voice heard, even to
show the wrath of his arm with wrath and anger and devouring
ﬂame, he shall thunder violently (upon them), and like water and
hail descending with violence. 
 31 For through the voice of the Lord shall the Assyrians be
vanquished, with the wound wherewithsoever he smiteth them.. 
 32 And it shall be unto him round about, whence was his hope
of help, wherein he himself trusted; they, with tabrets and harp,
shall turn and make war upon him. 
 33 For thou shalt not be deceived Before the days: was it also
prepared for thee to reign? a deep trench, layers of wood, ﬁre
and much wood? the wrath of the Lord is as a trench burning
with brimstone.

XXXI. 1 Ah, they that go down into Egypt for help; that
trust in horses and in chariots, for they are many, and in horses,
they are a great multitude; and trusted not in the Holy One of
’Israel, and sought not God. 
 2 And,. wise himself, he brought evils upon them; and his word
shall not be set at nought; and he shall rise up against the houses
of wicked men, and against their vain hope, 
 3 An Egyptian, a man, and not a god: the ﬂesh of. horses, and
’ there is no help (in them); but the Lord shall set his hand against
them, and they that (come to) help shall weary themselves, and all
shall perish together. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 4 For thus saith the Lord to me, Like as if the lion or the
whelp crieth out over the prey, which he hath taken, and roareth
over it until the mountains be filled with his voice; and they were
vanquished, and cowered before the greatness of his wrath; so
shall the Lord of Hosts come down to ﬁght against the mount
Zion, and against her mountains. 
 
 5 As birds ﬂying, so will the Lord hold a shield to defend
Jerusalem, and will deliver it, and preserve it, and will save it. 
 6 Turn you, ye that counsel the deep counsel, and the
disobedient; 
 7 For in that day shall men disown the works of their hands,
those of silver, and those of gold, which their hands have made. 
 8 And Asshur shall fall; not the sword of a man, nor the
sword of mankind, shall him; and he shall ﬂee, not from
before a pursuer; but the young men shall be vaniluished. 
 9 For they shall be encompassed by a rock, as with a palisade,
and shall be vanquished, and he that ﬂeeth shall be taken.
Thus saith the Lord, Happy is he who hath a seed in Zion, and
kinsmen in Jerusalem.

XXXII. 1 For behold, a just king shall reign, and rulers
shall rule with judgment. 
 2 And the man shall be, hiding these sayings, and he shall be
hidden as from rushing water; and he shall appear in Zion as a
rushing river, glorious in a thirsting land. 
 3 And no longer shall they put their trust in men, but they
shall lend ’ears to hear. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 4 And the heart of the weak ones shall attend to hear, and the
’mering tongues shall soon learn to speak peace. 
 5 And no longer shall they bid the fool to rule, and no longer
shall thy servants say, Hold thy peace. 
 6 For the fool will speak folly, and his heart will imagine vain
things, to fulfil transgressions, and to utter error against the Lord,
to scatter hungry souls abroad, and to make empty the souls that
thirst. 
 7 For the counsel of the wicked doth counsel transgressions,
to destroy the humble with unjust words, and to scatter the
reasonings of the humble in judgment. 
 8 But the godly counselled prudent things, and this counsel
shall abide. 
 9 Ye wealthy women, stand up, and hear my voice; ye
daughters in hope, hearken to my words. 
 10 For the days of a year call to remembrance in pain, with
hope; the vintage is consumed, the sowing is ceased, and shall no
longer come. 
 11 Be astonished, be grieved, ye confindent women; strip
yourselves, ’bare, gird sackcloth upon your loins. 
 12 And smite yourselves upon the breasts, for a ﬁeld of desire,
and the fruit of the vine. 
 13 The land of my people, the thorn and grass shall come
up, and joy shall be removed from every dwelling. A wealthy
city, 
 14 Desolate houses: they shall abandon the wealthiof a city,
and desirable houses; and the villages shall be caverns for ever,
a joy of wild asses, feeding places of shepherds, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 15 Until there come upon you a spirit from on high. And
Carmel shall be. desolate, and Carmel shall be reckoned as a
forest. 
 16 And judgment shall rest in the wilderness, and righteousness
shall dwell in Carmel. 
 17 And the works of righteousness shall be peace, and right-
eousness shall obtain rest, and they shall be confident ones for
ever. 
 18 And his people-shall dwell in a city of peace, and shall
dwell in confidence, and they shall rest amid wealth. 
 19 And the hail, if it descend, shall not come upon you. And
they that dwell in the forests shall be confident, as they in the
plain. 
 20 Blessed are they that sow upon every water, where ox and
ass treadeth.

XXXIII. 1 Ah, for them that ill-treat you, but you none
ill-treateth; and he that setteth at nought setteth not you at
nought; they that set at nought shall be taken and shall be
delivered up; and like a moth upon a garment, so shall they be i
crushed. 
 2 O Lord, have mercy us, for in thee do we trust; the
’seed of the disobedient hath fallen into destruction, but our
salvation is in a time of affliction. 
 3 Because of the voice of the fear of thee, peoples shrank
away, from the fear of thee, and the nations were scattered. 
 4 But now shall your spoils, from small and great, be gathered
together; like as if one gathereth locusts, so shall they make sport
upon you. ’ 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 Holy is God that dwelleth on high; Zion is ﬁlled with judg-
ment, and with righteousness. 
 6 By a law shall they be delivered up; in treasures is your
salvation; therein is wisdom and knowledge, and reverence
towards the Lord; these are the treasures of righteousness. 
 7 Behold now, in your fear shall they be afraid; they whom
ye feared shall be afraid because of you; for messengers shall be
sent, claiming peace, weeping bitterly, entreating for peace. 
 8 For their paths shall be made desolate; for the fear of the
nations is ceased, and their covenant with these is removed, and
’ye shall not reckon them as men. 
 9 The earth mourneth, Lebanon is ashamed, Sharon becometh
marshes; Galilee shall be made manifest, and Carmel. 
 10 Now will I rise up, saith the Lord, now will I be glorified
now will I be uplifted. 
 11 Now shall ye see, now shall ye be ashamed; vain shall be
the strength of your spirit, ﬁre shall devour you. 
 12 And the nations shall be burnt up, as a thorn cast upon a
ﬁeld and burnt up. 
 13 They that are from afar off shall hear what I have done;
they that draw near shall learn my strength. 
 14 The transgressors in Zion have stood aloof: trembling shall
take hold of the ungodly. Who shall declare unto you that a ﬁre
is burning? who shall declare unto you the place that is for ever? 
 15 One that walketh in righteousness, speaking in a straight
way, hating transgression and wrong doing, and shaking off his
hands from gifts; that maketh his ears dull, that he may not hear
a judgment of blood; that closeth his eyes, that he may not see
wrongdoing, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 16 He shall dwell in a. lofty cavern of a strong rock; bread
shall be given unto him, and his water (is) sure. 
 17 Ye shall see a king with glory, and your eyes shall behold
a land from afar off. 
 18 Your soul shall meditate on the fear of the Lord; where
are the scribes? where are the counsellors? where is he that
counted them that were nourished up together, 
 19 A small and a great people? with whom they took not
counsel, neither understood he their deep speech: 
 20 Behold Zion our city, our salvation; thine eyes shall see
Jerusalem, it is a wealthy city, tents which shall not be shaken,
’ nor shall the stakes of the tent thereof be disturbed for ever, nor
its cords broken: 
 21 For the name of the Lord is great. Ye shall have a place,
rivers and canals, wide and spacious; thou shalt not go by this
way, neither shall a ship go driving along. 
 22 For my God is great; he will not pass me by; the Lord is
our judge, the Lord is our ruler, the Lord is our king; the Lord,
he shall save us. 
 23 Thy cords are broken, for they were not strong; thy mast
hath bent, it will not loosen the sails, it will not lift Up a signal,
until it be given up for plunder; therefore shall many lame take
plunder. 
 24 And the people that dwelleth among them shall not say,
I am faint; for their sin is forgiven.

XXXIV. 1 Draw near, ye nations, and hearken, ye rulers;
let the earth hear, and they that dwell therein, the world, and the
people that is in it. 
 2 For the wrath, of the Lord is against all the nations, and
anger against the muster of them; to destroy them, and to give
them over to slaughter. 
 3 And their wounded shall be cast forth, and their dead, and
their stink shall go up, and the mountains shall be wet with their
blood. 
 4 And the heaven shall be rolled up like a book, and all the
stars shall fall like leaves from a vine, and as leaves fall from a
ﬁg tree. 
 5 My sword is drunken in the heaven; behold, it shall
descend upon Idumaea, and upon the people of perdition with
judgment. 
 6 The sword of the Lord is ﬁlled with blood, it is enriched
with fatness, and with the fat of goats and rams. For there is a
sacrifice to the Lord in the land of Bozrah, and a great slaughter
in Idumaea. 
 7 And the chief ones shall fall with them, and the rams and
the bulls; and the earth shall be drunken with the blood, and
shall be ﬁlled with the fat of them. 
 8 For it is the day of the judgment of the Lord, and the year
of the recompense of the judgment of Zion. 
 9 And the torrents thereof shall be turned into pitch, and
her land into brimstone; and her land shall be burning like
pitch, 
 10 By night and day; and shall not be quenched for ever; and
the smoke thereof shall ascend upward, it shall be desolated for
generations. 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 And birds, and hedgehogs, and ibises, and ravens shall
dwell therein; and there shall be cast over it the measuring line
of desolation, ’satyrs shall dwell therein. 
 12 Her rulers shall not be; for her kings and her rulers and
her great ones shall come to destruction. 
 13 And the thorn shall grow up upon her cities and upon her
strongholds: and it shall be lurking places for owls and a court of
ostriches. 
 14 And demons shall meet with satyrs, and shall call one
to another; there shall satyrs rest, for they have found them a
resting-place. 
 15 There doth the hedgehog nest, and the earth keepeth her
young in safety; there do the hinds meet, and see one ’s
faces:. 
 16 By number come they, and not one of them perisheth;
none seeketh another; for the Lord hath commanded them, and
his spirit hath brought them together. 
 17 And he himself shall cast lots for them, and his hand
divideth (for them) to feed; inherit it for ever; forgenerations of.
’ generations shall they rest thereon.

XXXV. 1 Be thou glad, O thirsting desert; let the wilder-
ness rejoice, and blossom as a lily; 
 2 And the desolate places of Jordan shall blossom and rejoice:
and the glory of Lebanon is given unto it, and the honour of
Carmel; and my people shall see the glory of the Lord, and the
exaltation of God. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 Be strong, ye slackened hands, and feeble knees: 
 4 Give comfort, ye faint hearted; be strong, fear not; behold,
our God will give a recompense of judgment, yea, will give; he
himself will come and save us. 
 5 Then shall the eyes of the blind men be Opened, and the
ears of deaf men shall bear. 
 6 Then shall a lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue of
stammerers shall be clear, for there hath broken out water in the
wilderness, and a torrent in a thirsting land. 
 7 And the waterless land shall become pools, and into the;
thirsting land shall come a fount of water; there shall be joy of
birds, beds of reed and pools. 
 8 A pure way shall be there, and it shall be called a holy way,
and (no unclean person shall pass by there, neither shall an
unclean way be there; but the dispersed shall walk upon it, and
they shall not err. 
 9 And no lion shall be there, nor shall any of the evil beasts
gloetrignthereon, nor be found there; but ransomed shall walk
therein, 
 10 And (those) gathered together because of the Lord; they
shall return, and come to Zion with joy, and everlasting joy upon
their head; for on their head (shall be) praise and triumph, and
joy shall take hold upon them; fled away is pain, and grief, and
sighing.

XXXVI. 1 And it came to pass, in the fourteenth year of
the reign of Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of the Assyrians came
up against the cities of Judah, that were strong, and took them. 
 2 And the king of the Assyrians sent Rabshakeh from Lachish
to Jerusalem, to king Hezekiah, with a great power; and he stood
in the watercourse of the upper pool, in the way of the fuller's
ﬁeld. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 And Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, the steward, went out to
him, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the
recorder. 
 4 And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye to Hezekiah, Thus
saith the great king, the king of the Assyrians: why trustest thou? 
 5 Cometh there battle array in counsel, or in words of the
lips? and now in whom dost thou trust, that thou resistest me? 
 6 Behold, thy trust is on this staff of reed, that is broken, upon
- Egypt: whosoever leaneth upon it, it will go into his hand; so is
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and all they that trust in him. 
 7 But if ye say, We trust in the Lord our God: 
 8 Now join ye with my lord, the king of the Assyrians, and
I will give you two thousand horses, if ye shall be able to furnish
men (to ride) upon them. 
 9 How, pray, can ye turn back the face of one governor?
they are slaves ’ trust in the Egyptians, for horse and for
horseman. 
 10 And now, are we come up without the Lord against this
land, to war against it? 
 11 And Eliakim said unto him, and Shebna the scribe, and
Joah, Speak unto thy servants in the Syrian tongue, for we understand
(it); and speak not to us in the Jewish tongue; and why
speakest thou in the ears of the men that sit upon the wall? 
 12. And Rabshakeh said to them, Hath my lord sent me to
your lord, or to you, to speak these words; is it not to the men
that sit on the wall, that they may eat dung and drink (their own)
water with you together? 
 
 
 
 

 
 13 And Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a great voice in the
Jewish tongue, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the
king of the Assyrians; 
 14 Thus saith the king: Let not Hezekiah deceive you with
words, which shall not be able to deliver you. 
 15 And let not Hezekiah say to you, God will deliver us, and.
this city shall not be given up into the hand of the king of the
Assyrians. 
 16 Hearken not to Hezekiah. Thus saith the king of the
Assyrians, If ye will be blessed, come out to me, and ye shall
eat everyone of his vine and his ﬁgs, and drink the water of your
cistern; 
 17 Until I come and take you to a land, as (is) your own land,
a land of corn and wine, and loaves, and vineyards. 
 18 Let not Hezekiah deceive you, saying, Your God will deliver
us. Have the gods of the nations delivered each one his own
land out of the hand of the king of the Assyrians? 
 19 Where is the god of Hamath and Arpad? and where is the
god of the city of Sepharvaim? were they able to deliver Samaria
out of my hand? 
 20 Which of the gods of all these nations delivered his land
out of my hand? that God shall deliver Jerusalem out of my
hand; 
 21 And they were silent, and none answered him a word,
because the king had commanded that none should answer. 
 22 And Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, the steward, went in, and
Shebna the scribe of the power, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the
recorder, unto Hezekiah, with their clothes rent, and reported
unto him the words of Rabshakeh.

XXXVII. 1 And it came to pass, when the king Hezekiah
heard (it), he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth about him, and
went up into the house of the Lord.

2 And he sent Eliakim, the steward, and Shebna, the scribe,
and the elders of the priests, with sackcloth about them, unto
Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz.

3 And they said to him, Thus saith Hezekiah, Today is a day
ἢ of affliction, and reproach, and reproof, and anger; for the pang
is come upon her that travaileth, and she hath not strength to
bring forth.

4 The Lord God hear the words of Rabshakeh, with which
the king of the Assyrians sent him to reproach the living God,
and to reproach with the words which the. Lord thy God hath
heard; [and thou shalt pray to thy Lord] concerning these that
are left.

5 And the servants of the king came to Isaiah

6 And Isaiah said to them, Thus shall ye say to your lord,
Thus saith the Lord, Fear not thou for the words which thou
hast heard, wherewith the envoys of the king of the Assyrians
have reproached me.

7 Behold, I will put a spirit in him, and he shall hear tidings,
and return to his land, and he shall fall by the sword in his
land.

8 And Rabshakeh returned, and came upon the king besieging
Libnah: and the king of the Assyrians heard

9 ThatTirhakah, king of the Ethiopians, had gone out to
besiege him; and when he heard it, he turned away, and sent
messengers to Hezekiah, saying,

10 Thus shall ye say to Hezekiah, king of Judah, Let not thy
God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem
shall be given over into the hand of the king of the Assyrians.

11 Hast thou not heard what the kings of the Assyrians have
-done to all the earth, how they have destroyed it?

12 Did the gods of the nations, they whom my fathers de-
stroyed, deliver them? Gozan, and Haran, and [Rezeph], which
are in the land of [Telassar]?

13 Where are the kings of Hamath, and of Arpad? and of
the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivah?

14 And Hezekiah took the book from the messengers, and
opened it before the Lord.

15 And Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord, saying,

16 O Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, that sittest upon the
cherubim, thou alone art the God of every kingdom of the world;
thou hast made heaven and earth.

17 Hearken, Ο Lord; look upon us, Lord, and see the
Ezrdds of Sennacherib, which he hath sent to reproach the living
God.

18 For in truth, the kings of the Assyrians have laid waste the
whole world, and their country,

19 And cast their idols into the ﬁre; for they were no gods,
but the works of men's hands, wood and stone; and destroyed
them.

20 But do thou, O Lord our God, save us outof their hand,
gag. every kingdom of the earth may know that thou alone art
God.

21 And Isaiah the son of Amoz was sent to Hezekiah, and
said to him, Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, I have heard
the prayers which thou madest to me concerning Sennacherib
king of the Assyrians. ’

22 This is the word which Godhath spoken concerning him;
The virgin daughter of Zion despiseth thee and mocketh thee;
the daughter of Jerusalem shaketh her head at thee.

23 Whom hast thou reproached and provoked? or against
’ hast thou lift up thy voice? what, hast thou not lifted up
thine eyes on high against the Holy One of Israel?

24 For by messengers thou hast reproached the Lord 3 for thou
saidst, By the multitude of my chariots have I gone up to the
height of the mountains, and to the utmost. parts of Lebanon,
and have Cut down the height of his cedar, and the beauty of his
cypress, and have entered into the height of the portion of his
forest,

25 And have made a mound, and have dried up waters, and
every gathering of water.

26 Hast thou not heard long since of these things that I have
done? from ancient days have I ordained it, and now have I
shown it forth, to make nations in strong places desolate, and
them that dwell in strong cities.

27 I slackened their hands, and they were withered up, and
became as green grass upon house-tops, and as wild couch-grass.

28 But now I know thy resting place, and thy going out,
thy coming in.

29 But thy rage with which thou ragedst, and thy bitterness,
have come up toward me, and I will put a muzzle on thy nose,
and ’a bit in thy lips, and will turn thee back by the way by which
thou camest.

30 And this is the sign to thee; eat, for this year, what thou
hast sown, and in the second year that which is left; and in the
third year sow and reap ye, and plant vineyards, and ye shall eat
the fruit thereof.

31 And there shall be they that are left in Judah, they shall
strike root downward, and bear seed upward.

32 For they that are left shall go forth from Jerusalem, and
they that are saved from mount Zion; the jealousy of the Lord of
Hosts will do this.

33 Therefore thus saith the Lord against the king of the
Assyrians, He shall not come into this city, nor cast a spear
against it, nor bring up a shield against it, nor compass it with a
trench,

34 But by the way that he came, by it shall he return. Thus
saith the Lord,

35 I will hold a shield before this city, to save it, for mine own
sake, and for David my ’s sake.

36 And there went forth an angel of the Lord, and destroyed
out of the camp of the Assyrians an hundred and fourscore
(and) ﬁve thousand; and (men) arising early found all the dead
bodies.

37 And Sennacherib king of the Assyrians turned, and
departed, and dwelt at Nineveh. ’

38 And as he was worshipping the god of his fathers in the
house of N isroch, Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him
with swords; but they made good their escape into Armenia; and
Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead. ’

XXXVIII. I And it came to pass at that time, Hezekiah
fell sick unto death; and Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz,
came unto him, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Give
orders concerning thine house; for thou diest, and shalt not live.

2 And Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto
the Lord,

3 Saying, Remember, Lord, how I have walked before thee
with truth, with a true heart, and have done that which is pleasing
in thy sight; and Hezekiah wept with great weeping.

4 And the word of the Lord came to Isaiah, saying,

5 Go, and tell Hezekiah, Thus saith the Lord, the God of
David thy father, I have heard the voice of thy prayer, and have
seen thy tears; behold, I add unto thy time ﬁfteen years:

6 And I will save thee out of the hand of the king of the
Assyrians, and I will hold a shield before this city.

7 And this is the sign to thee from the Lord, that God will
accomplish this word.

8 Behold, I turn the shadow of the steps, down which the sun
has gone, the ten steps of the house of thy father; I will turn the
sun back the ten steps. And the sun went up (again) the ten-
steps, down which the shadow had gone. ’

9 [A song.] Prayer of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had
fallen sick, and arisen from his Sickness.

10 I said, At the height of my days, in the gates of hell I shall
leave the residue of my years.

11 Ι said, I shall no more see the salvation of God in the
land, I shall no more see man.

12 From among my kindred; I have left behind the residue
of my-life; it is gone forth and departed from me, like him
that looseth. his tent which he hath pitched; my spirit in me
became as a web, when she that weaveth draweth near to cut
it off.

13 In that day was I given over until morning, as to a lion ; so
hath he crushed all my bones; for from the day until night was
I given over.

14 As a swallow, so will I cry, and as a clove, so will I rehearse
it; for mine eyes have failed from looking up to the height of
heaven to the Lord, who rescued me, and took away the anguish
of my soul.

15 * * * * * * *

16 Ο Lord; yea, it was told thee concerning it, and thou
didst rouse up my breath, and I was comforted, and came to life.

17 For thou hast delivered my soul that it should not perish,
and hast cast away all my sins behind me.

18 For they that are in hell shall not praise thee, nor shall the
dead bless thee, nor they in hell hope_for thy mercy.

19 The living shall bless thee, as I also do ; for from today
will I beget children which shall declare thy righteousness,

20 O Lord of my salvation; and I will not cease blessing thee
upon the psaltery, all the days of my life, in front of the house of
God.

21 And Isaiah said to Hezekiah, Take a cake of ﬁgs, and
bruise it, and apply it as a plaister, and thou shalt be whole.

22 And Hezekiah said, This is the sign, that I shall go up into
the house of the Lord God.

XXXIX. 1 At that time Merodach, the son of Baladan,
king of Babylonia, sent a letter and envoys and presents to
Hezekiah; for he heard that he had fallen sick unto death, and
had arisen again.

2 And Hezekiah rejoiced with great joy over them, and showed
them the house of the treasury, and of the balsam, and the
incense, and the myrrh, and the silver, and the gold, and all the
houses of the vessels of the treasure, and all that was among his
treasures; and there was nothing which Hezekiah showed them
not in his house.

3 And Isaiah the prOphet came to the king Hezekiah, and said
to him, What say these men, and from whence are they come to
thee? And Hezekiah said, They are come from a land (from)
afar unto me, from Babylon.

4 And Isaiah said, What saw they in thine house? An
’Hezekiah said, They saw all that is in my house, and there is
nothing in my house which they saw not, but (they saw) even that
which is among my treasures:

5 And Isaiah said unto him, Hear the word of the Lord of
Hosts;

6 Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, and they shall take
all that is in thine house, and all that thy fathers gathered together
unto this day shall come to Babylon, and they shall leave nothing
behind; and God said,

7 They shall take also of thy children, which thou shalt beget,
and shall make them eunuchs in the house of the king of the
Babylonians.

8 And Hezekiah said to Isaiah, Good is Lord's word
which he hath spoken: let there be now peace and righteousness
in my days.

XL. 1 Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith the Lord.

2 Ye priests, speak ye to the heart of Jerusalem, comfort her,
for her humbling is ﬁlled, her sin is atoned for, for she hath
received of the ’s hand double of her sins.

3 A voice, of one cryingiin the wilderness, Prepare ye the way
of the Lord, make straight the paths of our God.

4 Every valley shall be ﬁlled up, and every mountain and hill
shall be brought low; and the crooked places shall become
a straight (path), and the rough land smooth ways.

5 And the glory of the Lord shall be seen, and all ﬂesh shall
see the salvation of God, for the Lord hath spoken.

6 A voice of one saying, Cry! And I said, What shall I cry?
’All ﬂesh (is) grass, and all glory of man (is) as the ﬂower of
grass.

7 * * * * *

8 The grass is withered, and the ﬂower is fallen; but the word
of our God abideth for ever.

9 Go up upon a high mountain, thou that bringest good
tidings to Zion; lift up thy voice with thy strength, thou that
bringest good tidings to Jerusalem: lift ye up (your voice), fear
not; say thou to the cities of Judah, Behold your God.

10 Behold, the Lord cometh with strength, and his arm with
power: behold, his reward (is) with him, and his work before him.

11 As a shepherd shall he tend his ﬂock, and with his arm
shall he gather lambs, and shall comfort those with young.

12 Who measured the water with his hand, and the heaven
with a span, and all the earth with a handful? Who hath weighed
the mountains with a scale, and the valleys with a balance?

13 Who hath understood the mind of the Lord, and who was
his fellow-counsellor, that shall teach him?

14 Or with whom shared be his counsel, and he taught him?
or who showed him judgment? or who showed him the way of
understanding? or who gave to him at the ﬁrst, and it shall be
rendered him again? ’

15 If all the nations had been reckoned as a drop from a jar,
or as the turn of a scale, shall they be reckoned even as spittle?

16 And Lebanon is not sufficient for burning, and all the (four
footed) beasts are not sufficient for a (whole) burnt offering.

17 And all the nations are as nothing, and are reckoned for
nothing.

18 To whom liken ye the Lord, and with what likeness liken
ye him?

19 Doth the craftsman make an image, or a goldsmith cast
gold, and gild it over? doth he construct of it a likeness?

20 For a craftsman chooseth out a tree which doth not rot,
and seeketh cunningly how to set up an image there: and that it
may not be moved.

21 Will ye not learn? will ye not hear? was it not proclaimed
to you from the beginning? have ye not learnt the foundations of
the earth?

22 (It is) he that holdeth the circle of the earth, and they that
dwell in it are as locusts; he that setteth up the heaven as
a canopy, and stretcheth it out as a tent to dwell in,

23 He that giveth rulers to rule as nothing, and he made the
earth as nothing. ’

24 For they shall not sow, nor plant, neither shall their root be
rooted in the earth; he breatheth upon them, and they are
withered, and a tempest shall seize upon them as brushwood.

25 Now therefore to whom liken ye me, and I shall be exalted?
saith the Holy One.

26 Look up on high with your eyes, and see; who hath shown
forth all these things? he, that bringeth forth his array by number,
will call them all by name from the abundance of his glory, and in
the might of strength nothing faileth thee.

27 For say not, Jacob, and why sayest thou, Israel, My way is
hid from God, and my God hath taken away my judgment, and
hath stood aloof

28 And now, hast thou not learnt? hast thou not heard? the
everlasting God, God who hath framed the ends of the earth, will
not hunger, nor grow—nor is there any ﬁnding out of his
understanding—.

29 Giving strength to the hungry, and pain to them that
suffer not.

30 For youths shall hunger, and young men shall be weary,
and chosen men shall be without strength:

31 But they that wait for the Lord shall renew their strength;
they shall put forth wings as eagles; they shall run, and shall not
be weary; they shall walk, and shall not hunger.

XLI. 1 Be made new. toward me, ye islands: for the rulers
shall renew their strength: let them draw near, and let them
speak together, then let them proclaim judgment.

2 Who roused up righteousness from the rising of the sun,
called it to his feet, it shall go forth? he shall set it before
nations, and shall astonish kings; and he shall lay their swords
upon the earth, and their bows as brushwood that is cast forth.

3 And he shall pursue them, and the way of his feet shall pass
over in peace.

4 Who hath wrought and done these things? he called it, that
called it from the beginning of generations; I, even God, am the
ﬁrst, and unto the times to come, I am.

5 The nations saw, and were afraid, the ends of the earth drew
near, and came together,

6 ’everyone to help his neighbour and his brother,
and he shall say,

7 The craftsman is strong, and the smith smiting with a
hammer, beating withal; then will he say, The joining is good,
’ they have made them strong with nails; they will set them in
place, and they shall not be moved.

8 But thou, Israel, (art) my servant, Jacob whom I have
chosen, the seed of Abraham whom I loved:

9 On whom I took hold from the ends of the earth, and called
thee fromthe watch towers thereof, and said to thee, Thou art my
servant; I have chosen thee, and not forsaken thee.

10 Fear not, for I am with thee; be not dismayedL for I am
thy God that strengtheneth thee; and I have helped thee, and
have saved thee from falling by my just right hand.

11 Behold, all they that resist thee shall be ashamed and
turned backward; for they shall be as though they were not, and
all thy adversaries shall perish.

12 Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not ﬁnd the men ’who
shall evil intreat thee; for they shall be as though they were not,
and they that war against thee shall cease to be.

13 For I am God, that hold fast thy right hand, that ’to
thee, Fear not,

14 Jacob, thou little Israel; I have helped thee, saith the
God that ransometh thee, Israel.

15 Behold, I make thee as wheels of a cart, that thresh out;
new, with teeth like a saw; and thou shalt thresh the mountains,
and beat small the hills, and shalt make them as dust.

16 And thou shalt winnow them, and a wind shall take them,
and a tempest shall scatter them. But thou shalt rejoice among
the holy things of Israel.

17 And the poor and the needy shall triumph. For they shall
seek water, and there shall be none; their tongue is dried up with
thirst. I the Lord God, I the God of Israel will hear, and will
not forsake them.

18 But I will open rivers upon the mountains, and fountains in
the midst of the plains; I will make the wilderness into pools,
and the thirsty land into watercourses.

19 I will plant in the waterless land cedar and box, and myrtle
and cypress, and white poplar;

20 That they may see, and learn, and understand, and know
together that the hand of the Lord hath done all this, and the
Holy One of Israel hath shown it forth.

21 Your judgment draweth near, saith the Lord God; your
counsels have drawn near, saith the King of Jacob.

22 Let them draw near, and declare unto you what shall come
to pass; or tell ye (of) the former things, what they were, and we
will apply our thoughts; and perceive what the last things be:
and tell us the things that are coming.

23 Declare the things that are coming at the last, and we shall
perceive that ye are gods: do good, and do evil, and we will
wonder.

24 For whence are ye, and whence is your working? from the
earth. As an abomination have they chosen you.

25 I have raised up him from the north, and him from the
rising of the sun; they shall be called by my name; let rulers.
come, and like clay of a potter, and like a potter treading clay, so
shall ye be trodden down. ’

26 For who shall proclaim the things from, the beginning, that
we may learn them? or the former things, and we shall say that
they are true? there is none that foretelleth, nor any that heareth
your words.

27 I will give rule to Zion, and will comfort Jerusalem in
the way.

28 For from the nations, behold, no man; and from among
their idols there was none that declared (aught), and if I ask of
them, Whence are ye? they will not answer me.

29 For they are those that make you, and vain are they that
lead you astray.

XLII. 1 Jacob my servant, on him will I take hold;
Israel (is) my chosen, my soul hath received him; I have put my
spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment for the nations.

2 He shall not cry out, nor send forth (his voice), nor shall his
voice be heard without.

3 A bruised reed shall he not crush, and smoking ﬂax shall he
not quench, but shall bring forth judgment unto truth.

4. He shall shine out, and shall not be shattered, until he have
iegpiudgment upon the earth; and in his name shall nations

5 Thus saith the Lord, the God who made the heaven and
ﬁxed it, who established the earth and the things therein, and
grave breath to the people upon it, and spirit to them that tread
thereon,

6 Ι the Lord God have called thee in righteousness, and will
hold fast thine hand, and will strengthen thee, and have given
I thee for a covenant of a race, for a light of nations.

7 To open blind ’s eyes, to lead out from bonds them that
are bound, and men that sit in darkness out of a prison house.

8 Ι am the Lord God: this is my name; my glory will I not
give to another, nor my excellences to the graven images.

9 The things from of old, behold, they are come; and new
things do I proclaim, and before they sprang up they were made
plain to you.

10 Sing unto the Lord a new song; it is his dominion; glorify
his name at the end of the earth, ye that go down unto the sea
and sail upon it: the isles, and the inhabitants thereof.

11 Be glad, O wilderness and the villages thereof; ye lodges,
and the inhabitants of Kedar. They that dwell in a rock shall be
glad, upon the tops of the mountains.

12 They shall give glory to God, they shall proclaim his excellence
in the isles.

13 The Lord, the God of powers, shall come forth, and shall
break war in pieces: he shall stir up jealousy, and shall shout
against his enemies with might.

14 I have been silent: shall I be silent even for ever, and hold
my peace? I endured, as she that travaileth; I will amaze, and
I will dry up together.

15 And I will turn rivers into islands, and will dry up
pools.

16 And I will lead blind men by a way that they had not
learnt, and will make them to tread paths which they knew not;
I will make their darkness into light, and the crooked things into
(a) straight (path); these (are) the things which I will do, and will
not forsake them.

17 But they turned away backward. Be utterly ashamed, ye
that trust in the graven images; that say to the molten images,
Ye are our gods.

18 Hear, ye deaf; and look up, ye blind, and see.

19 And who is blind, but my servants? and deaf, but they that
are lords over them? and the slaves of God are blinded.

20 Full oft have ye seen, and taken not heed; your ears are
opened, and ye heard not.

21 The Lord God took counsel, that he might be justified, and
might magnify praise.

22 And I saw, and the people was plundered and spoiled; for
the snare is in treasuries everywhere, and in houses together;
where they hid themselves, they became a prey; and there was
none that set free a prey, and there was none that said, Restore.

23 Who is there among you that will give ear to this? he shall
hearken, for the time to come.

24 Who gave Jacob for a prey, and Israel to them that plunder
him? Is it not God, before whom they sinned, and they would
not walk in his ways, nor hear his law?

25 And he brought upon them the fury of his wrath, and war
overpowered them, and they that set them on fire round about,
and they understood not, each of them, neither laid it to heart.

XLIII. 1 And now thus saith the Lord God, who created
thee, O Jacob, he that formed thee, O Israel. Fear not, for
I have redeemed thee; I have called thee by thy name, thou art
mine.

2 Though thou pass through water, I am with thee, and rivers
shall not overwhelm thee; though thou go through ﬁre, thou shalt
not be burned, ﬂame shall not burn thee up.

3 For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy
Saviour; I have made Egypt and Ethiopia thy ransom, and set
Syene in thy stead.

4 Since thou hast become precious in my sight, thou hast been
glorified, and I have loved thee; and I will give many men on
behalf of thee, and rulers for thy head.

5 Fear not, for I am with thee; I will bring thy seed from the
East, and will gather thee from the West

6 I will say to the North, Bring (them); and to the South, Keep
not back: bring my sons from a land afar off, and my daughters
from the ends of the earth,

7 All that have been called by my name. For in my glory
have I established him, and formed (him), and made him,

8 And I led forth a blind people, and their eyes are likewise
blind, and they are deaf, though they have ears,

9 All the nations are gathered together, and rulers shall be
gathered from among them; who shall declare these things?
or who shall declare to you what was from the beginning? let
them bring their witnesses, and let them be approved, and let
them speak truth, and let them hear.

10 Be ye witnesses to me, and I am witness, saith the Lord
God, and the servant whom I have chosen out; that ye may learn,
and believe me, and understand that I am; before me there came
no other God, and after me there shall be none.

11 I am God, and beside me there is no Saviour.

12 I declared, and I saved, I reproached, and there was no
stranger among you; ye are my witnesses, and I am witness, saith
the Lord God,

13 Even from the beginning, and there is none that delivereth
out of my hands: I will do it, and who shall turn it back?

14 Thus saith the Lord God who redeemeth you, the Holy One
of Israel: For your sakes will I send to Babylon, and will rouse up
all that ﬂee, and the Chaldaeans shall be bound in stocks.

15 I am the Lord, God your holy one, he that shewed forth
Israel your king.

16 Thus saith the Lord, that giveth a way in the sea, and a path
in the mighty water,

17 He that bringeth forth chariots, and horse, and a mighty
throng; but they have lain down, and shall not arise, they are
quenched as ﬂax that is quenched:

18 Remember ye <not> the ﬁrst things, and consider not
things of old.

19 Behold, I do new things which shall now arise, and ye shall
learn them: and I will make a path in the desert, and rivers in
the waterless land:

20 The beasts of the ﬁeld shall praise me, owls, and the
daughters of ostriches; because I have given water in the desert,
and rivers in the waterless land, I will give my chosen race to
drink,

21 My people, whom I have preserved to set forth my
excellences.

22 Not now have I called thee, Jacob, nor made thee weary,
Israel:

23 No sheep have I of thy offering, nor didst thou glorify me
in thy sacrifices, nor serve in thy sacrifices; nor have I wearied
thee with frankincense,

24 Neither didst thou buy for me incense for silver, nor did
I desire the fat of thy offerings; but in thy sins and in thine
unrighteousness I stood before thee.

25 I am, I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions and will
not remember thine unrighteousnesses.

26 But do thou remember, and let us be judged; tell thou
ﬁrst thy transgressions, that thou mayest be justified.

27 Our fathers ﬁrst, and their rulers transgressed against me?

28 And the rulers defiled my holy things; and I gave Jacob
over to destroy (him) and Israel for a reproach.

XLIV. 1 But now hear, Jacob my servant, and Israel,
whom I chose (out).

2 Thus said the Lord God who made thee, and he that formed
thee from the womb, Thou shalt yet be helped: fear not, my
servant Jacob, and my beloved Israel whom I chose (out);

3 For I will give water in thirst to them that walk in a waterless
place; I will put my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessings upon thy children,

4 And they shall rise up as grass among water, and as a willow
by the side of a ﬂowing water.

5 This one shall say, I am God's, and this shall speak in the
name of Jacob; and another writeth, I am God's; upon the name
of Israel.

6 Thus saith God, the King of Israel, and his deliverer, God
of Hosts; I am ﬁrst, and I am hereafter; except me there is no
God.

7 Who is as I am? let him stand, let him call, and make ready
for me, since I made man for everlasting; and let them declare
to you the coming things before they come.

8 Hide not yourselves; did ye not give ear from the beginning,
and I declared it to you? ye are witnesses, whether there be a God
beside me; and they were not, at that time.

9 They that mould images, and that grave, are all of them
vain; they that make their own delights, which shall not help
them; but they shall be ashamed,

10 All they that mould a god, and grave unprofitable things:

11 And all are withered from whence they sprang, and (are)
dumb from among men; let them all be gathered together, and
they shall stand together, let them be turned backward and be
ashamed together.

12 For the craftsman sharpeneth iron, with an adze he
fashioneth it, and boreth it with a gimlet, worketh it with the arm
of his strength; and he shall be hungry, and shall be faint, and
not drink water:

13 The craftsman when he hath chosen a piece of wood, setteth
it up by measure, and ﬁtteth it together with glue; he maketh it
like the form of a great man, and like the goodliness of man, to set
it up in a house:

14 He cutteth wood out of the forest which the Lord planted,
and the rain made it to grow,

15 That it may be for men for burning; and he taketh thereof,
and is warmed; and they burn it, and bake loaves upon it; and
the rest he maketh into gods, and they worship them.

16 Whereof he burneth half in the ﬁre (and they burn them,
and bake loaves upon them), and roasteth meat upon it, and eateth,
and is ﬁlled: and when he is warmed, he saith, Sweet is it to me
that I am warmed, and have seen ﬁre.

17 But the rest of it he maketh a graven god, and worshippeth
it, and prayeth to it, saying, Deliver me, for thou art my god.

18 They have not learnt to have understanding, for they are
darkened, from seeing with their eyes, and understandingwith their
heart.

19 And he considereth not in his heart, nor pondereth in
his soul, nor perceiveth with his understanding, that he hath
burned half thereof in the fire, and baked loaves upon the ashes
thereof, and roasted meat, and eaten; and made the rest of it into
an abomination, and they worship it.

20 Learn ye that their heart is ashes, and they wander out of
the way, and no one can deliver his soul; see, ye will not say,
There is a lie in my right hand.

21 Remember this, Jacob, and Israel, for thou art my
servant; I formed thee for my servant, and thou, Israel, forget
not me.

22 For behold, I have blotted out thy transgressions as a cloud,
and thy sins as darkness; turn thou to me, and I will redeem
thee.

23 Rejoice, ye heavens, for God hath had mercy upon Israel:
sound the dumpet, ye foundations of the earth; shout, ye mountains,
in joy, ye hills, and all the trees upon them; for the Lord
hath had mercy on Jacob; and Israel shall be glorified.

24 Thus saith the Lord, that redeemeth thee, and formeth
thee from the womb, I am the Lord, that accbmplish this; I alone
stretched out the heaven, and established the earth.

25 Who else scattered the signs of ventriloquists, and divinations
from the heart? turning wise men backward, and making
foolish their counsel?

26. And establishing the words of his servants, and making true
the counsel of his messengers? he that saith to Jerusalem, Thou
shalt be inhabited, and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built;
and her desolate places shall arise:

27 That saith to the deep, Thou shalt be made desolate, and
I will dry up thy rivers:

28 That biddeth Cyrus be wise, and saith, He shall perform all
my desires; that saith Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built, and
I will lay the foundation of my holy house.

XLV. 1 Thus saith the Lord God to my anointed, Cyrus,
on whose right hand <I have> taken hold, for nations to submit
before him; and I will shatter the strength of kings, I will open
doors before him, and cities shall not be shut

2 I will go before him, and will level mountains, will break
down doors of brass, and will snap asunder bolts of iron

3 And I will give thee treasures of darkness, I will open to
thee hidden (treasures) <unseen>, that thou mayest learn
I am the Lord that call thy name, the God of Israel.

4 For my servant Jacob's sake, and Israel's whom I have
chosen, I will call thee by thy name, and will receive thee; but
thou knewest not me.

5 For I am the Lord God, and there is no other God beside
me; and they knew me not.

6 That they from the rising of the sun, and they from the
going down (thereof) may learn, that there is none beside me
and that I am the Lord God, and there is none other,

7 I, that establish light, and make darkness, that make peace,
and create evils: I am the Lord God that doeth all these things.

8 Let the heaven from above rejoice, and let the clouds shower
down righteousness: let the earth bring forth and make mercy to
spring up, and let righteousness spring up together. I am the
Lord that created thee.

9 What better things have I set up, as clay of the potter?
shall the plowman plow the earth? shall the clay say to the
potter, What doest thou, for thou workest not, neither hast
hands?

10 He that saith to the father, What wilt thou beget? or to the
mother, Where wilt thou travail ?

11 For thus saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, that
maketh the things to come; Ask ye me concerning my sons and
concerning my daughters, and concerning the works of my hands
give me a charge.

12 I made the earth, and man upon it; I with my hand
established the heaven, I commanded all the stars.

13 I raised him up with righteousness, and all his ways (shall
be) straight; he shall build my city, and shall turn the captivity
of my people, not with ransom, nor with gifts, saith the Lord of
hosts.

14 Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Egypt is weary, and the
merchandise of the Ethiopians: and the men of Saba, men of
lofty stature, shall pass over unto thee, and shall slaves unto
thee, and shall follow behind thee, bound with manacles, and
worship before thee, and in thee shall they pray: for in thee is
God, and they shall say, There is no God beside thee.

15 For thou an God, and we knew it not, O God of Israel,
Saviour.

16 All they that resist him shall be ashamed, and turned back-
ward, and shall walk in shame. Be ye made new toward me, ye
isles.

17 Israel is being saved by the Lord with an everlasting
salvation; they shall not be ashamed, nor be turned backward
for ever.

18 Thus saith the Lord, that made the heaven:—he is the
that showed forth the earth and made it, he himself set its
bounds; he made it not for a void, but to be inhabited: I am,
and there is none beside.

19 I have not spoken in secret, nor in a dark place of the
earth ; -Ῑ said not to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye a vain thing; Ι
am, I am one that speaketh righteousness, and declareth truth.

20 Be gathered together, and come ye, take counsel together,
ye that are being saved from among the nations. They had not
learnt, they that lift up the wood, their graving, and pray as to
gods that save not.

21 If they do declare it, let them draw near, that they may
learn together, who made these things to be heard, from the
beginning: then was it declared unto you, I am God, and there
is none other but me; righteous and a saviour, there is none
except me. ,

22 Turn ye to me, and ye shall be saved, ye that are from the
_ end of the earth ; I am God, and there is none other.

23 By myself I swear, that righteousness shall go forth from
my mouth; my words shall not be turned back; that unto me
shall every knee bow, and every tongue shall swear by God,

24 Saying, Righteousness and glory shall come unto him, and
all they that separate themselves shall be ashamed. ’ ’

25 From the Lord shall men be justiﬁed, and in God shall all
the seed of the children of Israel be gloriﬁed;

XLVI. 1 Fallen is Bel, crushed into pieces is Dagon: their
graven images were for wild beasts, and beasts of burden; lift
them up bound as a load for one that is weary and hungry,

2 And enfeebled, without strength also; who shall not be able
to be saved from war, but themselves were led captive.

3 Hear ye me, house of Jacob, and all the remnant of Israel,
that are carried from the womb, and reared up from a child.

4 Until old age I am, and until ye grow old, I am; I bear
with you, I made you, and I will let you (go) free, I will take you
up, and will save you.

5 To whom have ye likened me? See ye, deal cunningly, ye
that are led astray:

6 Ye that contribute gold out of a bag, and silver by balance
they will set it in a scale, and when they have hired a goldsmith,
they make works of their hands, and bow down, and worship
them.

7 They lift it upon the shoulders, and walk; and if they set it
down, it remaineth in his place, it shall not stir; and whosoever
calleth unto him, he shall not hear, he shall not save him from
evils.

8 Remember this, and lament; repent, ye that have gone
V astray, turn with your heart.

9 And remember the former things from eternity; for I am
God, (and there is none beside me :)

10 Declaring the last things before they come to pass, and
therewith they are fulfilled; and I said, All my counsel shall
sand, and all that I have counselled will I do.

11 Calling a fowl of the air from the East, and from a land
afar off them concerning whom I have counselled; I spake, and
led him, I created and made, I led him, and made his way plain:

12 Hearken to me, ye that have lost your heart, ye that are
far from righteousness.

13 I have brought near my righteousness, and the salvation
that cometh from me will I not delay: I have given salvation in
Zion to Israel for a glorifying.

XLVII. 1 Come down, sit upon the ground, virgin daughter
of Babylon; enter into the darkness, daughter of the Chaldaeans,
for no longer shalt thou. be any more called tender and delicate.

2 Take a millstone, grind meal, take off thy covering, uncover
thy grey hairs, make bare the legs, pass through rivers.

3 Thy shame shall be uncovered, thy reproaches shall appear;
I will do justice upon thee, no longer will I deliver thee over
unto men,

4 Saith thy deliverer, the Lord of Hosts, his name is the Holy
One of Israel.

5 Sit down in amazement, enter into the darkness, daughter of
the Chaldaeans: no longer shalt thou be called the strength of a kingdom.

6 I was provoked at my people, thou defiledst mine inheritance:
I gave (them) into thine hand, and thou showedst them no mercy;
thou didst make the yoke of the elder very heavy.

7 And thou saidst, I shall be a princess for ever; thou per-
ceivedst not this in thy heart, neither didst remember the last
things.

8 But now hear this, delicate one, that sittest, that art confident
that sayest in thine heart, I am, and there is none other; I shall
not sit as a widow, nor shall I come to know bereavement.

9 But now shall there come suddenly these two things in one
day, childlessness and widowhood shall come suddenly upon thee
in thy witchcraft; in the strength of thy enchantments exceeding
greatly,

10 In the hope of thy wickedness; for thou saidst, I am, and
there is no other: learn thou, that the understanding of these
things and thy harlotry shall be thy shame: and thou saidst in
thine heart, I am, and there is no other.

11 And there shall come upon thee destruction, and thou
shalt not perceive it; a pit, and thou shalt fall into it: and there
shall come misery upon thee, and thou shalt not be able to be
clear of it: and there shall come destruction suddenly upon thee,
and thou shalt not perceive it.

12 Stand now in thine enchantments, and thy abundant witch-
craft, which thou didst learn from thy youth, (to see) if thou
canst be helped:

13 Thou hast grown weary in thy counsels: let the astrologers
of the heaven stand and save thee; let them who look on the
stars declare to thee what is purposed to come upon thee.

14 Behold, all shall be burnt up as brushwood upon a ﬁre, and
they shall not deliver their soul from the ﬂame; since thou hast
coals of ﬁre, sit thereon.

15 These shall be thy help: thou didst weary thyself in thy
traffic from thy youth: each went astray by himself; but for thee
shall be no salvation.

XLVIII. 1 Hear ye this, house of Jacob, ye that are called
by the name of Israel, and that have come forth from Judah, ye
that swear by the name of the Lord God of Israel, calling him to
mind not with truth, nor with righteousness,

2 And holding by the name of the holy city, and staying yourselves
upon the God of Israel: the Lord of Hosts is his name.

3 Still haveI-declared the former things, and out of my mouth
went they forth, and came to be heard: I did them suddenly, and
they came to pass.

4 I perceive that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron
sinew, and thy brow brass.

5 And I declared to thee the things of old, before they came
upon thee; I made it to be heard of thee, lest thou shouldest
say, Mine idols have done it, and say, The graven and the
molten images have commanded me.

6 Ye have heard all, and ye perceived not; but I have also
made to be heard of thee the new things from henceforth which
shall come to pass; and thou saidst not,

7 Now come they to pass, and not long since, and not in
former days didst thou hear of them; lest thou shouldest say,
Yea, I perceive them.

8 Thou didst neither perceive nor know, nor did I open thine
ears from the beginning; for I perceived that thou wouldest
utterly set them at nought, and thou shalt be called a transgressor
even from the womb.

9 For my name's sake will I show thee my wrath, and my
glorious deeds will I bring upon thee, that I may not utterly
destroy thee.

10 Behold, I have sold thee, not for silver; and I delivered
thee out of the furnace of beggary.

11 For mine own sake will I do it unto thee; for my name is
polluted, and my glory will I not give to another.

12 Hear me, Jacob, and Israel, whom I call; I am ﬁrst, and I
am for everlasting:

13 And my hand laid the foundation of the earth, and my
right hand established the heaven; I will call them, and they
shall stand together.

14 And all shall be gathered together, and shall hearken.
Who declared these things unto them? Because I loved thee,
I did this upon Babylon, thy will, to destroy the seed of the
Chaldaeans.

15 I spake, I called him, led him, and made his way prosperous.

16 Draw near unto me, and hear ye this; from the beginning
have I not spoken in secret, nor in a dark place of the earth;
when it came to pass, there was I, and now the Lord hath sent
me, and his spirit.

17 Thus saith the Lord, thy deliverer, the Holy One of Israel:
<I am thy God,> I have shown to thee, that thou mayest
way wherein thou shalt walk.

18 And if thou hadst hearkened to my commandments, thy
peace should have been made as a river, and thy righteousness
as a wave of the sea;

19 And thy seed should have becoine as sand, and the off
spring of thy womb as the dust of the earth; nor shalt thou now
be utterly destroyed, nor shall thy name perish before me.

20 Come thou forth from Babylon, ﬂeeing from the Chaldaeans;
proclaim ye the voice of joy, and let this be heard,
report it to the end of the earth; say ye, The Lord hath
delivered his people Jacob.

21 And if they be thirsty, he will bring them through the
wilderness, he will bring water for them out of a rock; a rock
shall be cleft, and water shall ﬂow, and my people shall drink.

22 There is no rejoicing, saith the Lord, for the wicked.

XLIX. 1 Hearken to me, ye isles, and attend to me, ye
nations; after long time shall it stand, saith the Lord. From my
’s womb he called my name,

2 And set my mouth as a sharp sword, and under the shelter
of his hand he hid me; he made me as a chosen arrow, and in
his quiver he sheltered me,

3 And said unto me, Thou art my bondman, Israel, and in
thee will I, be glorified.

4 And I said, Vainly have I laboured, in vain and for nought
have I given my strength; therefore my judgment is from the,
Lord, and my toil before my. God.

5 And now thus saith the Lord, that formed me from the
womb his bondslave, to gather together Jacob and Israel unto
him, I will be gathered, and will be glorified before the Lord, and
my God shall be my strength.

6 And he said to me, It is a great, thing for thee, that thou
mayest be called my servant, that thou mayest set up the tribes
of Jacob, and turn again the dispersion of Israel; behold. I have
set thee for a light of nations, that thou mayest be for salvation
unto the end of the earth.

7 Thus saith the Lord thy deliverer, the God of Israel,
Sanctify him that lightly esteemeth his soul, him that is held
abominable by the nations, the slaves of the rulers; kings shall
see him, and rulers shall rise up and worship him for the
Lord's sake: for faithful is the Holy One of Israel, and I chose
thee.

8 Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time I heard thee,
and in a day of salvation I helped thee, and gave thee for a
covenant of nations, to establish the earth, and to cause to
inherit desolate heritages,

9 Saying to them that are in bonds, Go forth, and (bidding)
them that are in darkness be revealed. And in all the ways they
shall feed, and in all paths is their pasture.

10 They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall burning heat
nor sun smite them; but he that hath mercy on them shall comfort
them, and lead them through springs of waters:

11 And I will turn every mountain into a way, and every path
into a pasture for them.

12 Behold, these come from far, these from the north, and
these from the sea, and others from the land of the Persians.

13 Rejoice, ye heavens, and let the earth exult: let the
mountains break out in joy, because God hath had mercy on his
people, and hath comforted the humble among his people.

14 But Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me; and, The Lord
hath forgotten me.

15 Will a mother forget her little child, not to have mercy on
the offspring of her womb? but even if a woman should forget
this, yet will I not forget thee, saith the Lord.

16 Behold, I have painted thy walls upon my hands, and thou
art alway before me.

17 And sdon shalt thou be built by them, by whom thou
wast destroyed, and they that laid thee desolate shall come forth
from thee.

18 Lift up thine eyes around, and look on (them) all; behold,
they were gathered together, and came to thee; as I live, saith
the Lord, thou shalt clothe thee with them all, and shalt put them
on thee as a bride's adornment.

19 For thy desolate, and destroyed, and fallen places, shall.
now be narrow by reason of thine inhabitants; and they that
swallowed thee up shall be far removed from thee.

20 For thy sons, whom thou hast lost, shall say in thine ears,
The place is (too) narrow for me: make a place for me, that
I may dwell in it.

21 And thou shalt say in thine heart, Who begat me these?
Yea, I am childless and a widow, but who hath brought up these
for me? I have been left alone, but where had I these?

22 Thus saith the Lord, Behold, Iraise up towards the nations
my hand, and to the isles will I lift up my signal, and they shall
bring thy sons in their bosom, and shall lift thy daughters upon
thy shoulders,

23 And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and the princesses
thy nurses; they shall worship before thee on the face of the
earth, and shall lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt learn
that I am the Lord, and thou shalt not be ashamed.

24 Shall one take spoils from a giant? and if one take a captive
unlawfully, shall he be saved?

25 Thus saith the Lord, If one take a giant captive, he
shall take spoils, and taking them from a mighty man he shall
be saved; and I will judge thy cause, and I will deliver
thy sons:

26 And they that afflict thee shall eat their own ﬂesh, and
shall drink their own blood as new wine, and shall be drunken;
and all ﬂesh shall perceive that I am he that hath delivered thee,
and that layeth hold upon the strength of Jacob.

L. 1 Thus saith the Lord, Of what kind is the bill of your
mother's divorcement, wherewith I sent her away? or to what
debtor have I sold you? Behold, for your sins were ye sold,
and for your transgressions sent I your mother away.

2 Why was it that I came, and there was no man? I called,
and he listened not? Is not my hand strong to deliver? or have
I not strength to rescue? behold, by my threat I will make the
sea a desolation, and make rivers desolate, and their ﬁshes shall
be dried up because there is no water, and shall die for thirst.

3 And I will clothe the heaven with darkness, and will make
his shroud as sackcloth.

4 The Lord giveth me a tongue of instruction, to perceive
in season when I must speak a word; he gave me in the morning,
he added unto me an ear to hear,

5 And the instruction of the Lord openeth mine ears, and
I am not disobedient, nor gainsay (it).

6 I have given my back for scourges, and my cheeks for
blows, and my face I turned not away from the shame of
spittings,

7 And the Lord became my helper; therefore I turned not
back; but I set my face as a solid rock, and I perceived that
I should not be ashamed.

8 For he draweth near that justified me: who is he that
contendeth with me; let him stand up against me together; yea,
who is he that contendeth with me? let him draw near to me.

9 Behold, the Lord helpeth me: who shall harm me? behold,
all ye. shall wax old ’a garment, and as it were a moth shall
eat you up.

10 Who among you is he that feareth the Lord? let him listen
to the voice of his servant: ye that walk in darkness, they have
no light, trust ye in the name of the Lord, and stay yourselves
upon God.

11 Behold, all ye kindle a ﬁre, and strengthen a ﬂame; walk
by the light of your ﬁre, and in the ﬂame wherewith ye kindled
it; because of me came this upon you, ye shall lie down in pain.

LI. 1 Hearken to me, ye that pursue that is righteous, and
seek the Lord: look unto the solid rock which ye did hew, and
unto the hole of the pit which ye digged.

2 Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare
you; for he was one, and I called him, and blessed him, and
loved him, and multiplied him.

3 And thee will I now comfort, Zion, and I did comfort all her
waste places; <and I will make her waste places> as
and the western regions like a garden of the Lord; joy and
exultation shall they ﬁnd therein, confession and the voice of
praise.

4 Hearken to me, hearken, my people; and ye kings, give
ear unto me ; for a law shall go forth from me, and my judgment
for a light of the nations.

5 My righteousness draweth quickly near; and my salvation
also shall go forth, and in my arm shall the nations hope; the
isles shall wait for me, and in my arm shall they hope.

6 Lift up your eyes to the heaven, and look upon the earth
beneath 3 for the heaven is massed as smoke, and the earth shall
wax old like a cloke, and they that dwell on the earth shall die
like as those (things); but my salvation, shall be for everlasting,
and my righteousness shall not fail.

7 Hearken unto me, ye that know judgment, my people who
have the law in your hearts; fear ye not the reproach of men,
and be not overcome by their despising.

8 For as a cloke shall it be eaten up by time, and as wool
shall it be eaten up by a moth; but my righteousness shall be for
ever, and my salvation for generations of generations.

9 Awake, awake, Jerusalem, and put on the strength of thine
arm; awake as in the beginning of a day, as a generation of
eternity. Art not thou

10 She that maketh desolate the sea, the water, the abundance
of the deep? that made the depths of the sea a passage way
for the delivered,

11 and them that were redeemed? For by the Lord's doing
shall they return, and come to Zion with joy, and everlasting
exultation; for upon their head is exultation and praise, and joy
shall take hold of them; grief is fallen away, and pain, and
sighings.

12 I am, I am he that comforteth thee; learn of- whom thou
wast ware, and didst fear before a mortal man, and before a son
of man; who were dried up like grass.

13 And thou forgottest God that made thee, that made the
heaven, and laid the foundations of the earth; and didst fear
continually all the days the face of the wrath of him that was
afflicting thee, for (it was) as (though) he were minded to remove
thee; and now, where is the wrath of him that did afflict thee?

14 For in thy being saved he shall not stand (still), nor linger.

15 For I am thy God, which disturbeth the sea, and maketh
her waves to sound; the Lord of Hosts is my name.

16 I will put my words in thy mouth, and under my right
hand will I shelter thee; wherewith I set up the heaven, and
laid the foundation of the earth; and he shall say to Zion, Thou
art my people.

17 Awake, awake, stand up, Jerusalem, that hast drunk the
cup of wrath from the hand of the Lord; for thou didst drink,
and didst empty out the cup of falling, the goblet of (his)

18 And there was none that comforted thee from among all
thy children that thou broughtest forth; and there was none.
that took hold of thy hand from among all thy sons whom
thou didst raise up.

19 These two things are against thee; who shall grieve with
thee? ruin and destruction, famine and sword: who shall
comfort thee?

20 Thy sons are they that are helpless, that lie down at the
head of every passage way like sodden herbs; that are full
of the wrath of the Lord, that are undone through the Lord God.

21 Therefore hear, thou that art humbled, and drunken, not
with wine:

22 Thus saith the Lord, the God that judgeth his people,
Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of falling, the
goblet of (my) wrath, and thou shalt no more drink it again:

23 And I will put it ’the hands of them that did thee
wrong, and them that humbled thee; which said to thy soul
Bow down, that we may pass by; and thou laidest thy back even
with the ground, without, for them that went by.

LII. 1 Awake, awake, Zion; put on thy strength, Zion, and
put on ’glory, Jerusalem, holy city; no longer shall there pass
through thee again (one) uncircumcised and unclean.

2 Shake off the dust, and arise; sit down, O Jerusalem, put
off the bond from thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.

3 For thus saith the Lord, Ye were sold for nought, and not
with money shall ye be ransomed.

4 Thus saith the Lord, My people went down aforetime
into Egypt to sojourn there, and by force were they led to
the Assyrians.

5 And now, why are ye here? Thus saith the Lord, Because
my people were seized for nought, ye marvel and wail. Thus
saith the Lord, Because of you my name is continually blasphemed
among the nations.

6 Therefore my people shall learn my name in that day, that
I am verily he that speaketh: I am here,

7 Like beauty upon the mountains, like the feet of one
bringing glad tidings of news of peace, like one that bringeth
glad tidings of good things; for I will make thy salvation heard,
saying to Zion, God shall reign over thee.

8 For the voice of them that watch over thee is upraised, and
with their voice shall they rejoice together: for eyes shall look -
upon eyes, when the Lord hath mercy upon Zion.

9 Let the waste places of jerusalem break forth together in
joy, for the Lord hath mercy upon her, and bath delivered
Jerusalem.

10 And the Lord will make bare his holy arm before all the
nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation
that cometh from God.

11 Depart, depart ye, go forth from thence, and touch not what
is unclean; go forth from the midst of her, separate yourselves,
ye that bear the vessels of the Lord.

12 For not with confusion shall ye go forth, nor in ﬂight shall
ye go: for the Lord will go before in front of you, and the Lord,
the God of Israel, is he that gathereth you together.

13 Behold, my servant shall understand, and shall be exalted,
and be glorified exceedingly.

14 Like as many shall be amazed at thee,—so shall thy
be despised from among men, and thy glory from among men.

15 So shall many nations marvel at him, and kings shall shut
their mouth; for (they) to whom it was not declared shall see
concerninglhim, and they who have not heard shall understand.

LIII. 1 Lord, who did believe our report? and the arm of
the Lord, to whom was it revealed ? 
 2 We declared him as a child before him, as (is) a root in
a thirsty land; he hath no form nor glory. And we saw him,
and he had no form nor comeliness, 
 3 But his form was unhonoured, and failing among all men;
a man under a stroke, and one that knew how to bear sickness;
for his face is turned away, he was dishonoured and not
esteemed. 
 4 This is he that beareth our sins, and sorroweth for us;
and we esteemed him to be in trouble, and under a stroke, and
calamity. 
 5 But he was wounded for our transgressions, and was sick
because of our sins; the discipline of our peace was upon him;
with his stripe we were healed. 
 6 All we like sheep-did go astray, each strayed by his own
way; and the Lord gave him over to our sins. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 7 And be, for that he hath been evil ’eated, openeth not
his mouth; he was led as a sheep to slaughter, and as a lamb
dumb before the shearer, so he openeth not his mouth. 
 8 In humiliation his judgment was taken away; who
shall describe ’ generation? for his life is removed from
the earth; from the transgressions of my people was he led to
death. 
 9 And I give the wicked instead of his burial, and the
rich instead of his death; because he committed no transgression,
neither was guile found in his mouth. 
 10 And the Lord desireth cleanse him from his plague:
if ye offer for sin, your soul shall see a long lived seed: and
the Lord desireth to take (him) away .from the trouble of
his soul, 
 11 To show to him alight, and to form him with understanding
to justify a just one that serveth many aright, and
their sins shall he himself bear. 
 12 Therefore he shall make many to inherit, and the spoils
of the mighty shall he divide; because his soul was given over
unto death; and he was reckoned among the transgressors; and
himself bare the sins of many, and was given over because of
their sins.

LIV. 1 Rejoice, barren one that bearest not, break forth
and cry aloud, thou that travailest not; for many are the
of the desolate, rather than of her that hath her husband; for
the Lord hath spolten it. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 Widen the place of thy tent, and of thy curtains; make
fast, spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy
stakes : 
 3 Spread it out yet to the right hand and to the left; and
thy seed shall inherit nations, and thou shalt people cities that
have been desolate. 
 4 Fear not, because thou wast put to shame; and turn not
back, because thou wast reproached; for thou shalt forget thy
perpetual shame, and the reproach of thy widowhood shalt thou
not remember. 
 5 For thy Maker is the Lord, the Lord of Hosts is his name;
- and he that delivereth thee is the very God of Israel, he shall
be called (so) in all the earth. 
 6 Not as a woman forsaken <and faint of heart>
Lord called thee, nor as a woman hated from her youth, saith
thy God. 
 7 For a little while I forsook thee, and with great mercy will
I have mercy on thee. 
 8 In a little wrath I turned my face away from thee, and in
everlasting mercy have I had mercy ’on thee: saith the Lord
thy deliverer. 
 9 From the water that was in the time of Noah this is mine,
as I sware to him at that time, that I would no more be wroth
with the earth because of thee, nor for a threatening of thee
remove the mountains: 
 10 Nor shall thy hills be shaken from their place: so neither
shall the mercy that cometh from me upon thee fail, nor the
covenant of thy peace be removed ; for he said, TheLord is
gracious to thee. 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 Humbled and unstable, thou wast not comforted; behold,
I prepare for thee carbuncle for thy stone, and sapphire for
thy foundations. 
 12 And I will make thy battlements of jasper, and thy gates
of crystal stones, and thy circuit of chosen stones. 
 13 And (I will make) all thy sons instructed of the Lord, and
thy children (to be) in great peace. 
 14 (And in righteousness shalt thou be builded; refrain from
wrong, and thou shalt not be afraid, and trembling shall not
come nigh thee 
 15 Behold, strangers shall approach unto thee through me,
and they shall dwell by thee, and ﬂee for refuge to thee. 
 16 Behold, I create thee, not as doth a smith that bloweth
the coals, and bringeth forth an instrument for-a work: but I have I
created thee not for destruction, to waste thee. 
 17 Every instrument is corruptible, but against thee I will not
approve it; and every voice that shall stand up against thee for
judgment, all them shalt thou vanquish, and they that are subject
’to thee shall be therein. There is an inheritance for them that
attend on the Lord, and ye shall be righteous in my sight, saith
the Lord.

LV. 1 Ye that thirst, come to (the) water, and all ye that
have no money, come and buy, and drink, without money and
price, of the wine, and the fat. 
 2 Wherefore do ye value (them) for money, and your labour,
not for satisfying? and ye shall eat good things, and your soul
shall delight itself in good things. 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 Attend with your ears, and follow ye my paths; hearken
to me, and your soul shall live amid good things; and I will
make with you an everlasting covenant, the holy things of David
that are sure. 
 4 Behold, I have given him for a testimony among nations,
- a ruler and commander over nations. 
 5 Nations which knew not thee shall call upon thee; and
peoples which understand not thee shall ﬂee unto thee, for thy
’s sake, the Holy One of Israel; for he glorifieth thee. 
 6 Seek ye God, and as ye ﬁnd him, call upon him ; and when
soever he draweth near unto thee, 
 7 Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the man that transgresseth
his counsels; and let him return unto the Lord, and
he will have mercy upon him; for far away will he dismiss
your sins. 
 8 For my counsels are not as your counsels, nor are my ways
as your ways, saith the Lord. 
 9 But, as the heaven is far from the earth, so is my way far
- from your ways, and your thoughts from my thought. 
 10 For as rain cometh down, or snow from heaven, and will
not return, until it have watered the earth, and she, bring forth
and blossom, and shall give seed to the sower, and bread for
food: 
 11 So shall be my word, whatsoever goeth forth from my
mouth; it shall not return until all that I willed be fulfilled
and I prosper thy ways and my commandments. 
 12 For ye shall go forth in joy, and in delight shall ye be
taught; for the mountains and the hills shall leap forth, welcoming
’ you in delight, and all the trees of the ﬁeld shall clash their
branches, 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 13 And instead of the broom shall come up the cypress, and
instead of the fleabane shall come up a myrtle-tree; and the
Lord shall be for a name and for an everlasting sign, and shall
not fail.

LVI. Thus saith the Lord, Guard ye judgment, do righteousness;
for my salvation is come near to appear, and my mercy
to be revealed. 
 2 Happy is ’the man that doeth this, and the mortal that
holdeth fast thereto, and guardeth the sabbaths, not to pollute
them, and watcheth his hands, to do no wrong. 
 3 Let not the stranger, that cleaveth to the Lord, say, Then
will the Lord separate me from his people; and let not the
eunuch say, I am a dry tree. 
 4 Thus saith the Loid to all the eunuchs that keep my
sabbaths, and choose out what I desire, and hold fast to my
covenant: 
 5 I will give to them in my house and within my wall
’ a notable place; (it is) better than sons and daughters; an everlasting
name will I give to them, and it shall not fail; 
 6 And to all the strangers that cleave to the Lord, to serve
him, and to love the name of the, Lord, that they may be to
him for bondmen and for bondwomen; and ’for) all them
that. keep my sabbaths, not to pollute them, and hold fast to
my covenant, 
 7 Ι will bring them in to my holy mountain, and make them
joyful in the house of my prayer; their whole burnt offerings
and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar. For mine
house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations, 
 8 Saith the Lord that gathereth together the dispersed of Israel,
for I will gather unto him a gathering. 
 
 
 

 
 9 All ye wild beasts of the ﬁeld, come hither and eat, all ye
wild beasts of the forest. 
 10 See ye, that all are utterly blinded, they have not learnt
’ to have understanding; dumb dogs all, they will not be able to
bark; dreaming on their couch, prone to slumber. 
 11 And the dogs are insatiate of heart, and ’know not satisfy-
ing; and they are wicked, knowing no wisdom; all follow their
own ways, each after the same manner. 
 12 * * * * * * *

LVII. I See ye, how the righteous hath perished, and no
man accepts it in his heart, and righteous men are taken away,
and no man considereth; for from the face of wrong hath the
righteous been taken away, 
 2. His burial shall be in peace, he is removed out of the
midst; 
 3 But draw ye near hither, sons that are transgressors, ye
seed of adulterers and a whore. 
 4 Wherein do ye take delight? and against whom open ye
your mouth? and against whom do ye drop out your tongue?
are ye not children of perdition, a transgressing seed? 
 5 Ye, that call upon your idols under leafy trees, that slay
your children in the valleys amid ’rocksl 
 6 That is your portion, this is your lot: and for those thou
didst pour out drink-offerings, and to those thou didst bring
sacrifices: shall I not then be wroth for this? 
 7 Upon a mountain high and lofty, there was thy couch, and
there broughtest thou up sacrifices 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 And behind the posts of thy door didst thou set thy
memorials; thou thoughtest, that if thou shouldst revolt from
me, thou wouldst gain advantage; thou lovedst them that lay
with thee, 
 9 And didst multiply thine adultery with them, and madest
many them that were far off from thee, and didst send envoys
- beyond thy borders, and tumedst away, and wert abased even
to hell. 
 10 By thy much journeyings ’thou wert wearied, and saidst
not, I will cease; being strong in that thou didst thus; therefore
thou besoughtest me not. 
 11 Of whom wast thou ware, and fearedst; and didst deceive
me, and rememberedst me not, neither tookest me into thy
thought? and I saw thee, and looked aside, and thou fearedst
not me. 
 12 And I declare. my righteousness, and thy evil deeds; which
shall not profit thee. 
 13 When thou criest out, let them deliver thee in thy affliction
for a wind shall take all these, and a tempest shall hear them
away. But they that hold fast to me shall possess the earth,
ἢ and shall inherit my holy mountain, 
 14 And they shall say, Cleanse the paths before his face; remove
stumbling blocks from the way of my people. 
 15 Thus saith the Lord, the highest among the high, that
inhabiteth eternity, Holy among the holy is his name, the Lord,
the highest, resting among the holy, and giving patience to the
faint hearted, and giving life to them whose hearts are crushed: 
 16 And not for ever will I punish you, nor ’I alway be
angry with you 3 for a spirit shall go forth from me, and I have
made every breath. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 17 For sin I troubled him a little while, and I smote him,
and turned my face from him; and he was troubled, and went
gloomily in his ways. 
 18 I have seen his ways, and I healed him, and comforted
him, and gave him true comfort, 
 19 Peace upon peace to them that are far off, and them that
are near; and the Lord said, I will heal them: 
 20 But so the unrighteous shall be tossed as waves, and shall
not be able to rest. 
 21 There is no rejoicing, saith the Lord God, for the wicked.

LVIII. I Cry out with strength, and spare not, lift up thy
voice as a trumpet, and declare to thy people their sins, and to
the house of Jacob their transgressions. 
 2 They will seek me day by day, and desire to know my ways:
as a people that hath practised the righteousness of God, and
hath not forsaken the judgment of its God; they ask of me now
righteous judgment, and desire to draw near to God, 
 3 Saying, Why is it that we have fasted, and thou sawest not?
humbled our souls, and thou perceivedst not? for in the days
of your fast ye ﬁnd your desires, and vex all those subject
unto you. 
 4 Ye fast for quarrels and strife, and smite a humble man
with ﬁsts; wherefore fast ye before me as to-day, for your voice
to be heard in clamour? 
 5 This is not the fast that I choose, and a day for a man to
humble his soul; not even if thou bend thy neck like a ring,
and spread sackcloth and ashes under thee, not even so shall
ye call it an acceptable fast. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 6 Not such a fast as this do I choose, saith the Lord; but
loose every bond of iniquity, unloose the knots of oppressive
compacts, send forth the broken in forgiveness and tear asunder
every unjust writing: 
 7 Break thy bread for one that is hungry, and bring the
homeless poor into thine house; if thou see one naked, clothe
him, and of the kinsmen of thy seed thou shalt not despise
any. 
 8 Then shall thy light break forth early in the morning, and
thy healing shall arise speedily; and thy righteousness shall go
before thee, and the glory of God shall wrap thee round. 
 9 Then shalt thou cry, and God shall hearken to thee; while
thou art yet speaking, he shall say, Behold, here I am. If thou
take away from thee bonds, and stretching forth of hands, and
the word of murmuring, 
 10 And give to a hungry man thy bread from thy soul, and
satisfy the soul that hath been humbled, then shall thy light arise
in the darkness, and thy darkness (shall be) as noonday, 
 11 And thy God shall be <with thee> continually; and thou
shalt be satisfied according as thy soul desireth, and thy bones
shall be enriched, and shall be as a well-watered garden, and as
a spring whose water faileth not; and thy bones shall grow up
as grass, and shall be enriched, and they shall inherit for generations
of generations. 
 12 And thy desolate places of old shall be rebuilt, and thy
foundations shall be everlasting, for generations of generations;
and thou shalt be called, A builder of fences, and thou shalt
make thy paths in the midst to rest. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 13 If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbaths, not to do
thine own desires on the holy day, and thou shalt call the
sabbaths full of pleasure, holy to thy God, thou shalt not lift
thy foot for work, nor speak a word in anger out of thy mouth, 
 14 Then thou shalt have thy trust in the Lord, and he shall
set thee up upon the good things of the earth, and shall feed
thee upon the inheritance of Jacob thy father; for the mouth
of the Lord hath spoken this.

LIX. 1 Is not the Lord's hand mighty to save? or hath he
made his ear heavy, that it hear not? 
 2 But your sins separate between you <and your God,;>
because of your sins hath he turned his face away from you,
not to have mercy upon you. 
 3 For your hands are defiled-with blood, and your ﬁngers in
sins; and your lips have spoken transgression, and your tongue
doth meditate wrong-doing. 
 4 No man speaketh righteousness, nor is there any true judgment;
they trust in vanities and speak empty words; for they
have conceived trouble, and bring forth transgression. 
 5 They brake the eggs of asps, and weave the web of a spider;
and he that trieth to eat of their eggs, when he breaketh it he
ﬁndeth wind, and in it is a basilisk. 
 6 Their web shall not be for a garment; nor shall they be
clothed with their works; for their works are works of
transgression. 
 7 And their feet run after wickedness, swift to shed blood,
and their reasonings (are) the reasonings of fools; destruction
and unhappiness is in their ways, 
 
 
 

 
 8 And a way of peace they know not, and there is no judgment
in their ways; for the paths which they travel are perverted, and
they know not peace. 
 9 Therefore did their judgment depart from them, and righte-
ousness shall not take hold of them ; when (they) waited for light,
darkness came upon them; they waited for a shining, and walked
in midnight gloom. 
 10 They shall grope like blind men for a wall, and as though
they had no eyes shall they grope; and they shall fall at noonday
as though at midnight, they shall groan as dying men: 
 11 As a bear and as a dove together shall they go: we
waited for judgment, and there is none; salvation is far removed
from us. 
 12 For manifold is our transgression before thee, and our
sins stand forth against us; for our transgressions are in us, and
our wrong doings we have learnt. 
 13 We were profane, and lied, and departed away from behind
our God; we talked unrighteously and were disobedient, we
conceived and rehearsed unrighteous words from our heart, 
 14 And removed (our) judgment behind us, and righteousness
standeth far off from us; for truth is consumed in their streets,
and they could not go through by straight ways. 
 15 And truth is removed, and they changed their thought
from understanding; and the Lord saw it, and it pleased him
not, that there was no judgment. 
 16 And he saw, and there was no man, and he perceived,
and there was none that would take hold; and he defended them
with his arm, and with his mercy he supported them. 
 17 And he put on righteousness as a breast-plate, and put on
an helmet of salvation upon his head, and clothed himself in
a cloke of vengeance, and his clothing 
 
 
 
 

 
 18 As ready to requite, a requital of shame unto his
adversaries 
 19 And they from the setting (of the sun) shall fear the name
of the Lord, and they from the rising of the sun his glorious
name; for the anger of the Lord shall come like a rushing
river, it shall come with wrath. 
 20 And the deliverer shall come for Zion's sake, and shall turn
away ungodliness from Jacob. 
 21 And this is the covenant to them from me, saith the Lord;
my spirit which is upon thee, and the words which I have put
in thy mouth, shall not fail out of thy mouth, and out of the
mouth of thy seed: the Lord hath spoken it, henceforth and
for ever.

LX. 1 Shine, shine, Jerusalem; for thy light is come, and
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. 
 2 Behold, darkness and gloom covereth the earth upon (the)
nations; upon thee shall the Lord appear, and his glory shall
be seen upon thee: 
 3 And kings shall walk by thy light, and nations by thy
brightness. 
 4 Lift up thine eyes round about, and see thy children
i gathered together; behold, all thy sons are come from far, and
thy daughters shall be borne upon the shoulders. 
 5 Then thou shalt see, and fear, and be amazed in heart,
because there shall come over unto thee the wealth of the sea,
and of nations and peoples. And there shall come unto thee 
 
 
 
 

 
 6 Herds of camels, and the camels of Midian and Ephah
shall cover thee; all (they) from Sheba shall come, bringing gold,
and they shall bring frankincense and precious stone, and shall
bring glad tidings of the salvation of the Lord. 
 7 And all the sheep of Kedar shall be gathered together, and
the rams of Nebaioth shall come for thee, and acceptable (offerings)
shall be brought unto mine altar, and my house of prayer
shall be glorifed 
 8 Who are these that ﬂy like clouds, and like doves with
their nestlings? 
 9 For me did the isles wait, and the ships of Tarshish ﬁrst
of all, to bring thy children from far, and their silver and their
gold with them, because of the name of the Lord, which is holy,
and because the Holy One of Israel is glorious. 
 10 And strangers shall build thy walls, and their kings shall
stand beside thee: for because of my wrath I smote thee, and
because of my mercy I loved thee. 
 11 And thy gates shall be opened continually, by day and by
night they shall not be shut, to bring unto thee the power of
nations, and kings led along. 
 12 For the nations and their kings, whosoever will not serve
thee shall die, and the nations shall be utterly desolated. 
 13 And the glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, with
the cypress and pine and cedar together, to glorify my holy
place. 
 14 And there shall come unto thee in fear the sons of them
that humbled thee and provoked thee; and thou shalt be called,
City of the Lord, Zion of the Holy One of Israel, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 15 Because thou hast been forsaken, and hated, and there was
none that came to help; and I will set thee for an everlasting
triumph, a joy for generations of generations. 
 16 And thou shalt suck the milk of nations, and shalt eat the
wealth of kings; and shalt learn that I the Lord am thy Saviour,
and the God of Israel that delivereth thee. 
 17 And instead of brass I will bring for thee gold, and instead
of iron I will bring thee silver, and instead of wood I will bring
thee brass, and instead of stones iron; and I will set thy rulers
in peace, and thine overseers in righteousness. 
 18 And no longer shall wrong doing be heard in thy land, nor
destruction, nor unhappiness in thy borders; but thy walls shall
be called Salvation, and thy gates carved work. 
 19 And the sun shall not be thy light by day, nor shall the
rising of the moon enlighten thy night; but the Lord shall be
to thee an everlasting light, and God thy glory. 
 20. For thy sun shall not go down, and the moon shall not
fail thee; for the Lord shall be to thee an everlasting light, and
the days of thy mourning shall be fulfilled 
 21 And thy people (shall be) all of it righteous, and they shall
possess the earth for ever; guarding the plant, the work of his
hands, for glory. 
 22 The smallest shall be for thousands, and the least one a
great nation: I the Lord will gather them together in due season.

LXI. 1 The spirit of the Lord is upon me; wherefore he
hath anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor; he hath
sent me to heal the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to
captives, and recovery of sight to the blind: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 To call it an acceptable year of the Lord, and a day of
requital; to comfort all them that mourn; 
 3 That there be given to the mourners of Zion glory instead
of ashes, the anointing of joy to the mourners, a robe of glory
instead of a spirit of despair; and they shall be called generations
of righteousness, a plant of the Lord for glory. 
 4 And they shall build everlasting desolations, they shall set
up what were before utterly desolate, and they shall renew desolate
cities, that had been desolate for generations. 
 5 And strangers shall come, feeding thy sheep, and aliens for
plowmen and vinedressers. 
 6 But ye shall be called priests of the Lord, and ministers of
God; ye shall eat up the might of nations, and in their wealth
shall ye be marvelled at. 
 7 So shall they inherit the earth a second time, and everlasting
joy (shall be) upon their head. 
 8 For I am the Lord, that love righteousness, and hate
robberies (proceeding) from injustice: and I will give to the
righteous their toil, and I will make an everlasting covenant
with them. 
 9 And their seed shall become known among the nations, and
their offspring; every one that seeth them shall observe them,
that these are a seed blessed by God. 
 10 And with joy shall they rejoice unto the Lord. Let my
soul triumph because of the Lord; for he hath clothed me with
a cloke of salvation and a robe of joy, he hath put a garland
on (my head) as on a bridegroom, and hath adorned me with
ornaments as a bride. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 And like earth making her blossom to grow, and like
a garden its seeds; so will the Lord make righteousness and
triumph to rise up before all the nations.

LXII. I Because of Zion I will not be silent, and because
of Jerusalem I will not cease, until my righteousness go forth as
light, and my salvation shall burn as a torch. 
 2 And nations shall see thy righteousness, and kings thy
glory; and he shall call thee by thy new name, which the Lord
shall name. 
 3 And thou shalt be a crown of beauty in the hand of the
Lord, and a diadem of royalty in the hand of thy God. 
 4 And thou shalt no longer be called Forsaken, and thy land
shall not be any more called Desolate; for thy name shall be
called My delight, and thy land, Dwelling. 
 5 And as a young man joineth house with a virgin, so shall
thy sons found houses with thee; and it shall be, as a bridegroom
shall rejoice over a bride, so shall the Lord rejoice
over thee. 
 6 And upon thy walls, Jerusalem, have I set watchmen, all
the day and all the night, who shall not be silent for ever,
making mention of the Lord. 
 7 For ye have none (other) like; if he. establish, and make
Jerusalem an exultation upon the earth. 
 8 The Lord hath sworn by his glory and by the might of
I his arm, I will not any more give thy corn and thy meats to
thine enemies; and no longer shall stranger children drink thy
wine, for which thou didst labour. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 9 But they that gather them together shall eat them, and
praise the Lord; and they that gather them together shall drink
them in thy holy courts. 
 10 Go ye through my gates, and make a way for my people;
and cast away the stones out of the way, lift up a signal to the
nations 
 11 For behold, the Lord maketh it to be heard unto the end
of the earth; Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy
Saviour cometh to thee, having his own reward, and (his) work
before his face. 
 12 And he shall call it an holy people, ransomed by the Lord
while thou shalt be called, A city sought after, and, Not forsaken.

LXIII. 1 Who is this that approacheth from Edom, a red-
ness of garments from Bozrah? so beauteous in his apparel,
in violence with might? I discourse righteousness, and judgment
of salvation 
 2 Wherefore are thy garments red, and thy raiment as from
a trodden winepress? 
 3 (I am) full with the trodden (press); and of the nations
there is no man with me; and I trode them down in wrath,
and ground them, down as the earth, and brought down their
blood to the earth. 
 4 For a day of recompense is come upon them, and a year
of ransom is here. 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 And I looked on them, and (there was) no helper; and
I perceived, and no one took hold, and my arm rescued them,
and my wrath pressed on. 
 6 And I trampled them down with my anger, and brought
down their blood to the earth. 
 7 I called to mind the mercy of the Lord, the excellences
of the Lord in all things which the Lord recompenseth to us.
The Lord is an upright judge to the house of Israel, he bringeth
it upon us according to his mercy and according to the abundance
of his righteousness. 
 8 And he said, Are they not my people? children, and they
will not set at nought; and he was their salvation 
 9 Out of all affliction. It was no messengers, nor angel, but
the Lord himself that saved them, because he loved them, and
spared them; he it was that ransomed them, and took them up,
and uplifted them all the days of old. 
 10 But they disobeyed, and provoked the holy Spirit; and he
was turned to enmity against them, himself fought against them. 
 11 And he remembered the days of old: he that brought
up from the land the shepherd of the sheep. Where is he that
put his holy Spirit within them? 
 12 He that led Moses with his right hand? the arm of his
’ glory? he overcame the water before his face, to make himself
an everlasting name. 
 13 And he led them through the deep, like a horse through
the wilderness, and they wearied not, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 14 And as beasts through a plain; and a spirit dame down
from the Lord, and guided them; so didst thou lead thy people,
to make thyself a name of glory. 
 15 Turn thou from heaven, and see from thy holy house, and
(thy) glory: where is thy jealousy and thy might? where is the
abundance of thy mercy and thy pitifulness, that thou didst
bear with us? 
 16 Thou art our father; for Abraham knew us not, and Israel
recognized us not ; but thou, Lord, art our father; deliver us, thy
name is among us from the beginning. 
 17 Why didst thou make us to wander, Lord, from thy way?
didst harden our hearts, that we should not fear thee? turn
unto us, for the sake of thy bondmen, for the sake of the
tribes of thine inheritance, 
 18 That we may inherit a little of thy holy mountain: our
adversaries trode down thy sanctuary. 
 19 We are become as at the beginning, when thou didst not
rule over us, neither was thy name called upon us.

LXIV. r If thou openest the heaven, trembling shall seize
the mountains before thee, and they shall melt, 
 2 As wax melteth from before the ﬁre; and ﬁre shall burn
up thine enemies, and the name of the Lord shall be manifest
among thine enemies; from before thy face shall nations be
confounded, 
 3 When thou doest thy glorious deeds; trembling shall seize
the mountains before thee. 
 4 From everlasting have we not heard, nor have our eyes seen
any God except thee> and thy works which thou wilt do
them that wait for mercy. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 For he will meet them that do righteousness, and they shall
remember thy ways. Behold, thou wast wroth, and We sinned:
therefore we strayed, 
 6 And we all became as unclean, all our righteousness as
ﬁlthy rags; and we fell away like leaves because of our transgressions;
so shall a wind bear us away. 
 7 And there is none that calleth on thy name, or remembereth
to lay hold upon thee; for thou didst turn thy face away from us,
and didst deliver us over because of our transgressions. 
 8 And now, Lord, thou art our father; and we are clay,
all (are) the works of thy hands. 
 9 Be not wroth with us exceedingly, and remember not all
our sins betimes; and now look upon us, for we are all thy
people. 
 10 Thy city of the Holy One, Zion, is become desert;
Jerusalem is become as a desert: turned to a curse
II Is the house, our holy place: and the glory which our
I fathers blessed is burnt with ﬁre, and all (our) glorious things
are fallen together. 
 12 And for all this thou didst refrain, O Lord, and heldest
thy peace, and didst humble us exceedingly.

LXV. 1 I became manifest to them that sought me not;
I was found of them that inquired not of me; I said, Behold
(here) am I, to the nation which called not my name. 
 2 I spread forth my hands all the day, to a disobedient and
gainsaying people; to them which walked not by a way which
- was true, but after their own sins. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 This people is that which provoketh me continually to my
face; it is they that sacrifice in the gardens, and burn incense
upon the bricks to the demons that shall not be: 
 4 And they lie down in the monuments and in the caves for
the sake of dreams; they that eat swine's ﬂesh and broth of
sacrifies; all their vessels are ﬁled. 
 5 That say, Hence away from me, draw not near to me, for
I am clean: these are a smoke of my wrath, a ﬁre burneththerein
every day. 
 6 Behold, it is written before me, I will not be silent, until
I render into their bosom 
 7 Their iniquities, and (the iniquities) of their fathers, saith
the Lord; who burned incense upon the mountains, and reproached
me upon the hills; I will render their works into their
own bosom. 
 8 Thus saith the Lord: Like as the grape shall be found
amid the cluster, and they shall say, Hurt it not: for a blessing
of the Lord is in it: so will I do for the sake of him that serveth
me, for his sake will I not destroy (them) all. 
 9 And I will bring forth the seed that cometh from Jacob,
and from Judah, and it shall inherit my holy mountain, and my
chosen shall inherit it, and my bondmen shall dwell there. 
 10 And there shall be in the forest folds of ﬂocks, and the
valley of Achor shall be for a resting place for herds, for my
’ peOple who sought me. 
 11 But ye are they that forsook me, and that forget my holy
mountain; and prepare a table for the demon, and ﬁll a mingled
drink to Fortune. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 12 I will deliver you up to a sword, ye shall all fall by
slaughter: for I called you, and ye hearkened not; I spake, and
ye heard amiss; and did that which was evil before me, and
chose that which I desired not. 
 13 Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, they that serve me
shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; behold,. they that serve me
shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold, they that serve me
shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed. 
 14 Behold, they that serve me shall exult in joyfulness, but ye
shall cry out for weariness of your heart, and shall wail because
of the breaking of spirit. 
 15 For ye shall leave your name for a loathing for my chosen,
but you shall the Lord destroy. But they that serve him shall
be called by a new name, 
 16 Which shall be blessed upon the earth; for they shall bless
the true God, and they that swear upon the earth shall swear
by the true God. For they shall forget the ﬁrst affliction, and
it shall not come up into their heart. 
 17 For the heaven shall be new, and the earth new, and they
shall not remember the former things, nor shall they come into
their heart. 
 18 But they shall ﬁnd joy and exultation in her; behold,
I make Jerusalem an exultation, and my people a joy. 
 19 And I will exult in Jerusalem and rejoice in my people:
and no longer Shall there be heard in her the voice of weeping
and the voice of crying, 
 20 Nor shall there be there one untimely, nor an old man who
shall not fulfil his time: for the young shall be a hundred years
old, but he that dieth a sinner shall be a hundred years old, and
is accursed. 
 21 And they shall build houses, and themselves shall inhabit
them; and shall plant vineyards, and themselves shall eat the
fruits of them 
 
 
 
 

 
 22 And they shall. not build, and others inhabit; and they
shall not plant, and others eat. For according to the days of
the tree of life are the days of my people; the works of their
labours shall they make to grow old. 
 23 And my chosen ones shall not labour in vain, nor bring
forth children for a curse; for it is a seed blessed by God, and
their offspring shall be with them. 
 24 And it shall be, before they cry out, I will hearken to
them; while they are yet speaking, I will say, What is it? 
 25 Then shall wolves and lambs feed together, and a lion
shall eat chaff as an ox, and a serpent shall eat the earth as
bread: they shall not do wrong nor hurt upon my holy mountain,
saith the Lord.

LXVI. 1 Thus saith-the Lord, The heaven is my throne,
and the earth the footstool of my feet; what kind of house will
’ye build for me? or of what kind is the place of my rest ? 
 2 For all these things hath my hand made; and all these
things are mine, saith the Lord; and unto whom shall I look, save
to him that is humble, and quiet, and trembleth at my words? 
 3 But the transgressor, who sacrificeth to me a bullock, is as
one that slayeth a dog, and he that offereth ﬁne ﬂour as though
it were swine's blood; he that giveth frankincense for a memorial,
as a blasphemer; and they chose their own ways, and
their abominations, which their soul desired. 
 4 And I will choose their mockeries, and requite unto them
their sins: for I called them, and they hearkened not unto me;
I spake, and they heard not: and they did that which was wicked
before me, and chose out things which I willed not. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word;
speak, our brethren, to them that hate us and hold (us) in
abomination, that the name of the Lord may be glorified, and
may be seen in their joy; and they shall be ashamed. 
 6 A voice of crying from the city, a voice from the temple,
a voice of the Lord requiting a requital to them that resist him. 
 7 Before the travailing woman brought forth, before the pain
of her pangs came, she escaped, and bare a man-child. 
 8 Who (hath) heard such a thing, and who hath seen it so?
did the earth travail in one day, was a nation ever born at once?
for Zion travailed, and she brought forth her children. 
 9 But it was I that gave thee this expectation, and thou
remerriberedst me not, saith the Lord: behold, is it not I that
make the fruitful and the barren? saith thy God. 
 10 Rejoice, O Jerusalem, and keep solemn assembly, all ye
that dwell in her; rejoice with joy, all ye that mourn over her. 
 11 That ye may suck, and be ﬁlled from the breast of her
consolation; that ye may suck out, and take delight from the
entering in of her glory. 
 12 For thus saith the Lord: Behold, I do incline toward them
like a river of peace, and like a torrent overflowing the glory of
nations: their children shall be borne upon the shoulders, and on
the knees shall they be comforted, 
 13 As whomsoever a mother shall comfort; for so will I also
comfort you, and in Jerusalem shall ye be comforted. 
 14 And your heart shall see and rejoice, and your bones shall
grow up as herbage: and the hand of the Lord shall be made
known to them that worship him, and he shall threaten the
disobedient. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 15 For behold, the Lord shall come as a ﬁre, and his chariots
as a whirlwind, to render vengeance in wrath, and utter rejection
in a ﬂame of ﬁre. 
 16 For by the ﬁre of the Lord shall all the earth be judged,
and all ﬂesh by his sword: many shall be wounded by the Lord. 
 17 They that hallow and purify themselves for the gardens,
and eat swine's ﬂesh, and their abominations, and the mouse, in
the forecourts, shall be consumed together, saith the Lord. 
 18 And I (know) their works, and their reasoning; I am
coming to gather together all the nations and the tongues, and
they shall come, and shall see my glory. 
 19 And I will leave signs upon them, and I will send forth
from them those that are saved to the nations, to Tarshish, and
Phut, and Lud, and Meshech, and Tubal, and to Greece, and
to the isles afar off; men who have not heard my name,
I neither have seen my glory: and they shall declare my glory
among the nations. 
 20 And they shall bring your brethren out of all the nations
for a gift to the LORD, with horses and chariots, in mule-chariots
with awnings, into the holy city Jerusalem, saith the Lord, that
the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices to me with
psalms, into the house of the Lord. 
 21 And from them will I take me priests and Levites, saith
the Lord. 
 22 For like as the heaven (is) new, and the earth (is) new,
’which I make remaineth before me, saith the Lord: so
shall your seed and your name stand. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 23 And it shall be, for month after month, and sabbath after
sabbath, all ﬂesh shall come before me to worship at Jerusalem,
saith the Lord. 
 24 And they shall go forth, and shall see the limbs of the
men ’that have transgressed against me: for their worm doth
not cease, and their ﬁre shall not be quenched: and they shall
be for a spectacle to all ﬂesh.