PARALLEL TRANSLATIONS 

 
 ISAIAH 
 FROM HEBREW 
 I. 1 The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw
concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham,
Ahaz, (and) Hezekiah, kings of Judah. 
 2 Hear, Ο heavens, and give ear, Ο earth: for the LORD hath
spoken, I have nourished and brought up sons, and they have
rebelled against me. 
 3 The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his ’s crib:
Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider. 
 4 Ah, sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of
evildoers, sons that deal corruptly; they have forsaken the LORD,
they have scorned the Holy One of Israel, they are gone away
backward. 
 5 Why will ye be still stricken, (that) ye revolt more and more?
the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. 
 6 From the sole of the foot even unto the head (there is) no
soundness in it; wound, and weal, and putrefying sore: they
have not been pressed out, neither bound up, neither is it
mollified with oil. 
 7 Your country is a desolation, your cities are burned with
ﬁre; your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is a
desolation, like an overthrow of strangers. 
 8 And the daughter of Zion is left as a booth in a vineyard, as
a ’tent in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city. 
 
 
 
 

 
 I. x The vision which Isaiah the son of Amoz saw, which
he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem, in the reign of Uzziah,
Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, who ’over Judah. 
 2 Hear, O heaven, and give ear, earth; for the Lord hath
spoken, I have begotten sons and upraised them, but they have
set me at nought. 
 3 The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his ’s crib:
but Israel knoweth me not, and the people understandeth me not. 
 4 Ah, sinful nation, a people full of sins, an evil seed, lawless
sons: ye have forsaken the Lord, and angered the Holy One of
Israel. 
 5 Why should ye be yet smitten, (for) transgressing further?
every head (turns) to weariness, and every heart to grief. 
 6 From the feet to the head, neither wound, nor stripe, nor
inflamed hurt: there is no means to apply a balm, or oil, or
bandages. 
 7 Your land is desolate, your cities are burnt with ﬁre; your
country, strangers devour it before your face, and it has been
desolated, ruined by stranger peoples. 
 8 The daughter of Zion shall be left like a booth in avineyard,
and like a watching-hut in a cucumber garden, like a city
besieged. 
 
 
 

 
 9 Except the LORD of Hosts had left us a very small remnant,
we should have been as Sodom, we should have been like unto
Gomorrah. 
 10 Hear the word of the LORD, ye rulers of Sodom; give ye
ear unto the law of our God, people of Gomorrah. 
 11 To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto
me? saith the LORD: I am sated with the burnt offerings of rams,
and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of
bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats. 
 12 When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this
at your hand, to trample my courts? 
 13 Bring no more vain (meal-) offerings; incense is an abomination
unto me; new moons and sabbaths, callings of assemblies;
I cannot away with iniquity and the solemn meetings. 
 14 Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth:
they are a cumbrance unto me: I am weary of bearing. 
 15 And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes
from you; yea, when ye multiply prayer, I will not hear; your
hands are full of blood. 
 16 Wash you, make you clean; remove the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes; cease to do evil, 
 17 Learn to do well; seek judgment, correct the oppressore
judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. 
 18 Come now, and let us confer together, saith the LORD;
though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow:
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. 
 19 If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the
land: 
 20 But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be eaten (by) the sword
for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it. 
 
 
 

 
 9 And unless the Lord of Hosts had left us a seed there, we
should have become as Sodom, and we should have been made
like as Gomorrah. 
 10 Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom; attend ye
to the law of God, people of Gomorrah. 
 11 What is the abundance of your sacrifices to me? saith the
Lord: I am full of burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of lambs,
and the blood of bulls and of goats I desire not, 
 12 Not even if ye come to appear before me. For who hath
demanded this of your hands? Tread my court 
 13 Ye shall not, any more; if ye bring me ﬁne ﬂour, it is vain;
incense, it is an abomination to me; your new moons, and the
sabbaths, and a great day, I cannot bear: fasting and idleness, 
 14 And your new moons, and your feasts, my soul hateth;
ye are become to me a surfeit! no longer will I let your sins be. 
 15 When ye stretch out your hands toward me, I will turn away
mine eyes from you; and if ye multiply your petition, I will not
listen to you; for your hands are full of blood. 
 16 Wash you, become clean; take away your wickednesses
from your souls before mine eyes; cease from your wickednesses, 
 17 Learn to do well; seek out judgment, deliver one wronged,
judge for the orphan, justify the widow. 
 18 And ’come, and let us be convicted, saith the Lord; and if
your sins be as a scarlet thing, I will make them white as snow;
and if they be as crimson, I will make them white as wool. 
 19 And if ye be willing, and hearken unto me, ye shall eat the
good things of the land: 
 20 But if ye be not willing, neither hearken unto me, a sword ’
shall devour you; for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken this. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 21 How is the faithful city become an harlot! she (that) was
full of judgment, righteousness lodged in her; but now murderers: 
 22 Thy silver is become dross, thy wine impaired with water: 
 23 Thy princes (are) rebellious, and companions of thieves:
every one of them loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards: they
judge not the fatherless, ’doth the cause of the widow
come unto them. 
 24 Therefore thus saith the Lord, the LORD of hosts, the
mighty one of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and
avenge me of mine enemies. 
 25 And I will bring back mine hand upon thee, and purge
away as (with) lye thy dross, and take away all thine alloy: 
 26 And I will restore thy judges as at the ﬁrst, and thy
counsellors as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt be called
Citadel of righteousness, faithful city. 
 27 Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts
with righteousness. 
 28 And (there shall be) a shattering of the rebels and of the
sinners together, and they that forsake the LORD shall come to an
end. 
 29 For they shall be ashamed of the terebinths which ye have
desired, and ye shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have
chosen. 
 30 For ye shall be as a terebinth whose leaf withereth, and as
a garden that hath no water. 
 31 And the strong shall become as tow, and his work as a
spark, and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench
them. 
 
 
 

 
 21 How is the faithful city Zion become a harlot! (once)
full of judgment, and in her righteousness did rest; but now
murderers. 
 22 Your silver is base; thy hucksters mix the wine with water: 
 23 Thy rulers are disobedient; companions of thieves, that
love gifts, that pursue a recompense; that judge not for orphans,
and attend not to the cause of a widow. 
 24 Therefore thus saith the Ruler, the Lord of Hosts, Ah, the
strong ones of Israel! for my wrath shall not cease upon mine
adversaries, and I will exact judgment from mine enemies. 
 25 And I will turn mine band upon thee, and burn thee into
purity, and the disobedient will I destroy, and take away all
transgressors from thee, and will humble all arrogant ones. 
 26 And I will set up thy judges as in former time, and thy
counsellors as from the beginning; and after that thou shalt be
called City of righteousness, faithful mother-city Zion. 
 27 For with judgment shall her captivity be saved, and with
mercy. 
 28 And the transgressors and the sinners together shall be
broken in pieces, and they that forsake the Lord shall be brought to an end.
to an end. 
 29 For they shall be ashamed for their idols, which themselves
desired, and shall be ashamed for their gardens, which they longed for. 
 30 For they shall be as a terebinth that hath cast off its leaves,
and as a park with no water. 
 31 And their strength shall be as a stalk of ﬂax, and their
works as sparks of ﬁre, and the transgressors and the sinners
shall be burned up together, and there shall be none that shall
quench them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 II. 1 The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning
Judah and Jerusalem. 
 2 And it shall come to pass in the end of the days, the mountain
of the ’S house shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and shall be lifted up above the hills; and all nations
shall ﬂow unto it. 
 3 And many peoples shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go
up tothe mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of
Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the
LORD from Jerusalem. 
 4 And he shall judge between the nations, and shall decide for
many peoples; and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares,
and their spears into pruning hooks; nation shall not lift up
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. 
 5 O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of
the LORD. 
 6 For thou hast forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob,
because they be replenished from the East, and are soothsayers
like the Philistines, and strike hands with the children of aliens. 
 7 And their land is full of silver and gold, neither is there any
end of their treasures; and their land is full of horses, neither is
there any end of their chariots: 
 8 And their land is full of false gods: they worship the work
of their own hands, that which their own ﬁngers have made: 
 9 And the mean man is bowed down, and the great man is
brought low; and forgive them not. 
 

 
 II. I The word that came from the Lord to Isaiah the son
of Amoz concerning Judah and concerning Jerusalem 
 2 For in the last days shall the mountain of the Lord be
clearly seen, and the house of God upon the top of the mountains,
and it shall be uplifted above the hills, and all the nations shall
come unto it. 
 3 And many nations shall go, and shall say, Come, let us go up
into the mountain of the Lord, and into the house of the God of
Jacob; and he will proclaim to us his way, and we will walk in it.
For out of Zion shall a law come forth, and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem. 
 4 And he shall judge between the nations, and shall convince
much people; and they shall beat their Swords into ploughshares,
and their spears into pruning hooks; and nation shall not any
more take a sword against nation, and they shall not learn to war
any more. 
 5 And now, Ο house of Jacob, come, let us walk by the light
of the Lord. 
 6 For he hath given up his people, the house of Israel; because
their country is ﬁlled with omens, as at the ﬁrst, like the land of
the Strangers, and many strange children are born to them. 
 7 For their country is ﬁlled with silver and gold, and there
is no number to their treasures; and their land is ﬁlled with
horses, and there is no number to their chariots: 
 8 And the land is ﬁlled with abominations, the works of their
hands, and they worship things which their own ﬁngers have
made: 
 9 And a mean man boweth down, and a great man is humbled,
and I will not let them be. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 10 Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, from before
the fear of the LORD, and from the glory of his majesty. 
 11 The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness
of men shall be bowed down, and the LORD alone shall be
exalted in that day. 
 12 For the LORD of Hosts hath a day upon every one that is
proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up; and he
shall be brought low: 
 13 And upon all the cedars of Lebanon, high and lifted up,
and upon all the oaks of Bashan, 
 14 And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills
that are lifted up, 
 15 And upon every lofty tower, and upon every fenced wall, 
 16 And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all images of
desire; 
 17 And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the
haughtiness of men shall be made low: and the LORD alone shall
be exalted in that day. 
 18 And the false gods—the whole shall pass away. 
 19 And they shall go into the caves of the rocks, and into the
holes of the dust, from before the fear of the LORD, and from the
glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to terrify the earth. 
 20 In that day a man shall cast his false gods of silver, and his
false gods of gold, which they made for him to worship, to the
moles and to the bats; 
 21 To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the crevices of
the crags, from before the fear of the LORD, and from the glory of
his majesty, when he ariseth to terrify the earth. 
 22 Cease ye from man, in whose nostrils is a breath; for
wherein is he to be accounted of ? 
 

 
 10 And now, enter into the rocks, and hide yourselves in the
earth, from before the fear of the Lord, and from the glory of his
strength, when he ariseth to shatter the earth. 
 11 For the eyes of the Lord (are) lifted high, but man (is)
humble: and the uplifting of men shall be humbled, and the
Lord alone shall be uplifted in that day. 
 12 For there is a day of the Lord of Hosts against every
worker of pride, and overweening one, and against every one that
is high and lofty, and they shall be humbled: 
 13 And against every cedar of Lebanon, of them that are high
and lofty, and against every oak-tree of Bashan, 
 14 And against every mountain, and against every high
hill, 
 15 And against every high tower, and against every high
wall, 
 16 And against every ship of the sea, and against every sight
of the beauty of ships: 
 17 And every man shall be humbled. and the uplifting of men
shall fall, and the Lord alone shall be uplifted in that day. 
 18. And all the works of men's hands shall they hide away, 
 19 Carrying them into the caves, and into the rents of the
rocks, and into the holes of the earth, from before the fear of the
Lord, and from the glory of his strength, when he ariseth to
shatter the earth. 
 20 In that day shall a man cast out his abominations, the
silver and the golden, which he made to worship, to the vain ones
and to the bats; 
 21 To go into the holes of the solid rock, and into the rents of
the rocks, from before the face of the Lord, and from the glory of
his strength, when he ariseth to shatter the earth.
* * * * 
 
 
 

 
 III. I For behold, the Lord, the LORD of Hosts, doth take
away from Jerusalem and from Judah the stay and the staff, the
whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water, 
 2 Mighty man, and man of war, judge, and prophet, and
diviner, and elder, 
 3 Captain of ﬁfty, and him that is high of face, and counsellor,
and cunning artificer, and skilled enchanter, 
 4 And I will give children to be their princes, and freakishness
shall rule over them. 
 5 And the people shall oppress one another, each against
another, and each against his neighbour; the child shall be
insolent against the ancient, and the vile against the honourable. 
 6 When a man shall take hold of his brother in) the house of
his father: Thou hast clothing, thou shalt be our ruler, and let
this ruin be under thy hand: 
 7 In that day shall he lift up (his voice) saying, I will not be a
binder up: for in my house is neither bread nor clothing; ye
shall not make me a ruler of the people. 
 8 For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen; because their
tongue and their doings are against the LORD, to defy the eyes of
his glory. 
 9 The show of their face doth witness against them; and they
declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their
soul! for they have awarded evil unto themselves. 
 10 Say ye to the righteous, that it is well; for they shall eat the
fruit of their doings. 
 11 Woe unto the wicked, it is ill! for the reward of his hands
shall be given him. 
 
 
 
 

 
 III. I Now behold, the ruler, the Lord of Hosts, will take
away from Judah and from Jerusalem him that is strong and her
that is strong, the strength of bread and the strength of water, 
 2 Giant, and strong man, and man of war, and judge, and
prophet, and diviner, and elder, 
 3 And captain of ﬁfty, and wonderful counsellor, and skilful
artificer, and understanding listener, 
 4 And I will set up youths as their rulers, and mockers shall
lord it over them. 
 5 And the people shall fall together, each against another, and
each against his neighbour; the child shall stumble against the
elder, the dishonoured against the honourable. 
 6 For a man shall take hold of his brother, or of his father's
kinsman, saying, Thou hast a cloke, be thou our leader, and let
my meat be subject to thee. 
 7 And he shall answer and say in that day, I will not be thy
leader; for there is no bread in my house, neither a cloke; I will
not be a leader of this people. 
 8 For Jerusalem is abandoned, and Judah is fallen down; and
their tongues (are) with transgression, (they are) disobedient
toward the Lord; wherefore now is their glory humbled. 
 9 And the shame of their face is risen up against them; and
they have proclaimed their sin as of Sodom, and made it plain.
Woe unto their soul! for they have counselled evil counsel
against themselves, 
 10 Saying, Let us bind the just, for he is of ill service to us:
therefore shall they eat the fruit of their works. 
 11 Woe to the transgressor ἕ evil shall befall him according to
the works of his hands. 
 
 
 

 
 12 My people, their oppressors are children, and women rule
over them. My people, they which lead thee cause thee to err,
and swallow up the way of thy paths. 
 13 The LORD standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the
peoples. 
 14 The LORD will enter into judgment with the elders of his
people, and the princes thereof; and ye—ye have eaten up
vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your houses. 
 15 What mean ye, that ye crush my people, and grind the face
of the poor? saith the Lord GOD of Hosts. 
 16 And the LORD said, Because the daughters of Zion are
haughty, and walk with throat stretched out and staring eyes;
tripping along they go, and making a tinkling with their feet: 
 17 Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the-crown of the
head of the daughters of Zion, and the LORD will lay bare their
secret parts. 
 18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of the
anklets, and headbands, and crescents, 
 19 The pendants, and the bracelets, and the veils, 
 20 The head-tires, and the stepping chains, and the sashes, and
the scent-boxes, and the amulets, 
 21 The (seal) rings, and nose-jewels, 
 22 The festal robes, and the mantles, and the shawls, and the
satchels, 
 

 
 12 My people, your exactors glean you, and the tax gatherers
shall lord it over you: my people, they that call you happy cause
you to err, and confound the path of your feet. 
 13 But now shall the Lord stand up for judgment, and shall
set up his people for judgment. 
 14 The Lord himself shall come to judgment with the elders
of the people, and the rulers thereof. But ye, why did ye burn
my vineyard, and the spoil of the poor is in your houses? 
 15 Why do ye wrong my people, and shame the face of the
poor? 
 16 Thus saith the Lord, Because the daughters of Zion are
uplifted, and walk with uplifted neck, and with winkings of the
eyes, and in the passage of their feet both sweeping their skirts
and mincing with their feet the while, 
 17 (So) also shall God humble the principal daughters of Zion,
and the Lord shall discover their form 
 18 In that day; and the Lord will take away the glory of their
apparel, and their adomments, and the braidings, and the fringes,
and the crescents, 
 19 And the pendant, and the adornment of the face, 
 20 And the ordering of the adornment of their glory, and the
bracelets, and the armlets, and the braiding (of hair), and the
bangles, and the ﬁnger rings, and the earrings, 
 21 And the garments edged with purple, and shaded with
purple, 
 22 And the hangings about the house, and the Laconian
gauzes, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 23 The glasses, and the linen shifts, and the turbans, and the
scarfs. 
 24 And it shall be, instead of sweet spices there shall be
rottenness; and instead of a girdle a rope; and instead of curled
hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth;
brandinginstead of beauty. 
 25 Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy might in the war. 
 26 And her gates shall lament and mourn; and she shall be
emptied; on the ground shall she sit. 
 IV. I And in that day seven women shall take hold of
one man, saying, We will eat our own bread, and wear our own
apparel; only let thy name be called upon us; take away our
reproach. 
 2 In that day. shall the sprout of the LORD be for ornament
and for glory, and the fruit of the earth shall be for pride and for
beauty to them that are escaped of Israel. 
 3 And it shall be, that he that is left in Zion, and remaineth
in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, every one that is written down
for living in Jerusalem. 
 4 When the Lord shall have washed away the ﬁlth of the
daughters of Zion, and shall have purged away the blood of
Jerusalem from the midst of her by the spirit of judgment, and
by the spirit of burning. 
 5 And the LORD will create upon every habitation of mount
Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud by day, and smoke, and
the shining of a ﬂaming ﬁre by night; for upon all the glory is a
canopy, 

 
 23 And the (garments) of ﬁne linen, and of blue, and scarlet,
and the ﬁne linen embroidered with gold and with blue, and the
reclining veils. 
 24 And there shall be, instead of a sweet smell, dust; and
instead of a girdle thou shalt gird thyself with a rope, and instead
of the golden adornment of the head thou shalt have baldness
because of thy works, and instead of the purple shaded robe thou
shalt gird thyself about with sackcloth. 
 25 And thy son. the fairest, whom thou lovest, shall fall by
the sword, and your strong men shall fall by the sword, and shall
be humbled: 
 26 And the coffers of your ornaments shall mourn, and thou
shalt be left alone, and shalt be trodden into the earth.
IV. I And seven women shall take hold of one man, saying,
We will eat our own bread, and wear our own clothing; only let
thy name be called upon us; take away our reproach. 
 2 But in that day shall God shine in counsel with glory upon
the earth, to uplift and to glorify that which is left of Israel. 
 3 And it shall be, that which is left behind in Zion, and left
in Jerusalem, they shall be called holy, all they who were written
unto life in Jerusalem. 
 4 For the Lord shall cleanse the ﬁlth of the sons and of the
daughters of Zion, and shall purge the blood from the midst of
them, by the spirit of judgment <and the spirit of birning> 
 5 And he shall come, and it shall be, every place of the mount
Zion, and all that is round about her; a cloud shall shadow it by
day, and like as when smoke and as a light of ﬁre burneth by
night; it shall be sheltered by all the glory (of the Lord), 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 6 And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day-time
from the heat, and for a refuge and for a covert from storm and
from rain. 
 v. I Let me, I pray, sing for my beloved a song of my
loved one for his vineyard. My beloved bath a vineyard, on
a hill-top, the son of oil; 
 2 And he digged it, and cleared it of stones, and planted it
with the vine of Sorek, and built a tower in the midst of it, and
also hewed out a wine-fat therein; and he looked that it should
bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild-grapes. 
 3 And now, ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and man of Judah,
judge, I pray, betwixt me and my vineyard. 
 4 What is there yet to do to my vineyard, that I have not
done in it? Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth
grapes, brought it forth wild-grapes? 
 5 And now let me, I pray, tell you what I will do to my
vineyard; Ι will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be
consumed; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be
trodden down; 
 6 And I will make it a waste; it shall not be pruned, nor
hoed; and there shall come up briers and thorns; and I will
command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. 
 7 For the vineyard of the LORD of Hosts is the house of Israel,
and the man of Judah his pleasant plant 3 and he looked for judg-
ment, and behold oppression; for righteousness, and behold a cry. 
 
 
 
 

 
 6 And it shall be for a shadow from heat, and as a covering
and a hiding place from stress and from rain storm. 
 V. 1 Now will I sing for my beloved a song of my loved one
for my vineyard. My beloved hath a vineyard on a hill-top, in
a fertile place; 
 2 And I set a hedge around it, and fenced it, and planted
a vine of Sorek, and built a tower in the midst of it, and digged
a wine-fat therein; and I waited for it to bring forth a cluster of
grapes, and it brought forth thorns. 
 3 And now, man of Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem,
judge ye betwixt me and my vineyard. 
 4 What shall I do yet for my vineyard, that I have not done
for it? because I waited for it to bring forth a cluster of grapes,
but it brought forth thorns. 
 5 But now I will declare to you what I will do to my vineyard;
I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be plundered; and
destroy the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down; 
 6 And I will abandon my vineyard, and it shall not be pruned,
nor digged; and there shall come up into it thorns, as into
a waste place; and I will command the clouds, to shower no
rain upon it. 
 7 For the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel,
and the man of Judah a beloved young plant; I waited for (him)
to bring forth judgment, but he brought forth transgression, and
not righteousness, but a cry. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay ﬁeld to
ﬁeld, till there is no room, and ye are made to dwell alone in the
midst of the earth! 
 9 In mine ears (said) the LORD of Hosts, If there be not many
houses desolate, great ones and fair, without inhabitant! 
 10 Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and a
homer of seed shall yield an ephah. 
 11 Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they
may follow strong drink; that tarry late in the dusk, while wine
inflames them! 
 12 And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine,
are their banquet; but they regard not the work of the LORD,
neither consider the operation of his hands. 
 13 Therefore my people are gone into captivity, for lack of
knowledge: and their glory are men of famine, and their
abundance dried up with thirst. 
 14 Therefore Sheol hath enlarged her appetite, and opened
her mouth without measure: and her honour, and her abundance,
and her uproar, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into her. 
 15 And the mean man shall be brought down, and the
mighty man shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall
be. humbled: 
 16 And the LORD of Hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and
God that is holy sheweth himself holy in righteousness. 
 17 Then shall the lambs feed as (in) their pasture, and the
waste places of the fat ones shall sojourners eat. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 Woe, they that join house to house, and set ﬁeld next to
ﬁeld, that they may rob somewhat from their neighbour; will ye
dwell alone upon the earth? 
 9 For this was heard in the ears of the Lord of Hosts; For if
houses become many, they shall be a desolation; great ones and
fair, and there shall be none that inhabit them. 
 10 For where ten yoke of oxen plough, it shall yield one jar,
and he that soweth six bushels shall get three measures. 
 11 Woe, they that rise up early, and follow strong drink; that
tarry till late; for wine shall burn them up. 
 12 For with harp, and psaltery, and tabrets, and pipes, drink
they their wine; but they regard not the works of the Lord,
and the works of his hands they consider not. 
 13 Therefore is my people become captive, because they
know not the Lord; and is become a multitude of dead bodies,
because of famine and thirst for water. 
 14 And Hades enlarged his appetite, and opened his mouth,
continually; and her glorious, and great, and rich ones, and her
pestilences, shall descend. 
 15 And the mean man shall be humbled, and the great man
shall be dishonoured, and the eyes that are lifted up shall be
humbled: 
 16 And the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and
God, the Holy One, shall be glorified in righteousness. 
 17 And they that are spoiled shall graze as bulls, and the
waste places of them that are taken away shall lambs eat. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 18 Woe, they that drag iniquity with cords of vanity, and
(their) sin as it were with a cart rope: 
 19 That say, Let him make speed, let him hasten his work,
that we may see: and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel
draw nigh and come, that we may know; 
 20 Woe, they that call evil good, and good evil; that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet,
and sweet for bitter! 
 21 Woe, they that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in
their own sight! 
 22 Woe, they that are mighty to drink wine, and men of
strength to ’strong drink: 
 23 Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the
justice of the just from him! 
 24 Therefore as the tongue of ﬁre devoureth the stubble, and
the dry grass sinketh down in ﬂame, their root shall be as rottenness,
and their blossom shall go up as dust: because they have
rejected the law of the LORD of Hosts, and despised the word of
the Holy One of Israel. 
 25 Therefore is the anger of the LORD kindled against his
people, and he hath stretched ’ his hand against them, and
hath smitten them; and the hills did tremble, and their carcases
were as refuse in the midst of the open places. For all this his
anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. 
 26 And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and
will hiss unto them from the end of the earth: and behold, they
shall come with speed swiftly: 
 

 
 18 Woe, they that drag along their sins as with a long rcpe,
and their transgressions as with a cow-hide chariot trace: 
 19 That say, Let him speedily bring near what he will do, that
we may see; and let the counsel of the Holy One &003C; of Israel
come, that we may perceive: 
 20 Woe, they that call evil good, and good evil; that set darkness
as light, and light as darkness; that set bitter as sweet, and
sweet as bitter! 
 21 Woe, they that are prudent in themselves, and have understanding
in their own sight! 
 22 Woe, they that are strong among you, that drink wine, and
the powerful ones, that mingle the strong drink: 
 23 That justify the impious for ’ sake, and remove the
justice of the just. 
 24 Therefore, like as a reed shall be burned by coals of fire.
and burned up by blazing ﬂame, their root shall be as chaff, and
their blossom shall go up as whirling dust: for they desired not
the law of the Lord of Hosts, but they provoked the oracle of <
Holy One of > Israel. 
 25 And the Lord of Hosts was wroth with anger against his
people, and laid his hand upon them, and smote them; and the
mountains were provoked (to anger), and their carcases became as
dung in the midst of the way. Amid all this his wrath is not
turned away, but his hand is still upraised. 
 26 Therefore he shall raise up a signal among the nations afar
off, and shall hiss unto them from the end of the earth; and,
behold, quickly they come swiftly. 
 
 
 
 

 
 27 None shall be weary, nor stumble among. them; none shall
slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed,
nor the latchet of their shoes be broken: 
 28 Whose arrows are sharpened, and all his bows bent, his
’ hoofs shall be counted like flint. and his wheels like. a
whirlwind: 
 29 His roar is like a ’; he shall roar like young lions;
and he growleth, and seizeth the prey, and shall carry it away safe,
and none shall deliver it. 
 30 And in that day he shall growl over him, as the growling of
the sea; and if one look unto the earth, behold darkness, distress,
and light; it groweth dark in the heavens thereof. 
 VI. 1 In the year that king Uzziah died saw I the Lord
sitting ’upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train ﬁlled the
temple. 
 2 Seraphim stood above him; each one had six wings; with
twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and
with twain he did ﬂy. 
 3 And one kept crying unto another, and saying, Holy, holy,
holy, is the LORD of Hosts; all the earth is full of his glory. 
 4 And the bases of the thresholds were shaken at the voice (of
him) that cried, and the house began to fill with smoke. 
 5 And I said, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a
man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of
unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King, the LORD of
Hosts. 
 6 And there ﬂew one of the seraphim unto me, and in his
’ hand a live coal, which. he had taken with the tongs from OH the
altar; 
 
 

 
 27 They shall not <hunger nor> grow weary, nor nod, nor
sleep, nor shall they loose their girdles from their loins, nor shall
the thongs of their sandals be broken: 
 28 Whose darts are sharp, and their bows bent; their ’
hoofs are as solid rock; the wheels of their chariots were counted
as a whirlwind. 
 29 They spring like lions, and are come up like a ’s
whelp; and he shall take hold, and shall roar as a wild beast, and
shall cast them out, and there shall be none that delivereth them, 
 30 And he shall roar because of them, in that day, as the voice
of a surging sea; and they shall look upon the earth, and behold,
cruel darkness in their dismay. 
 VI. 1 And it came to pass, in the year that king Uzziah died,
I saw the Lord seated upon a throne, (that was) high and lifted
up, and the house was full of his glory. 
 2 And seraphim stood around him; each one had six wings;
and with twain they covered their face, and with twain they
covered their feet, and with twain they did fly. 
 3 And they cried one to another and said, Holy, holy, holy, is
the Lord of Hosts; all the earth is full of his glory. 
 4 And the lintel was lifted up, at the voice with which they
cried, and the house was ﬁlled with smoke. 
 5 And I said, O wretched me, for I am amazed; for being
(but) a man, and with impure lips, I dwell in the midst of a
people with impure lips: and I have seen the King, the Lord of
Hosts, with mine eyes. 
 6 And there was sent to me one of the seraphim, and in his
hand he had a coal of ﬁre, which he had taken with the tongs
from the altar; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 7 And he made it touch my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath
touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin
atoned for. 
 8 And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I
send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I, send
me. 
 9 And. he-said, Go, and say to this people, Certainly hear ye,
but understand not; and see ye, but perceive not. 
 10 Make the heart of this people fat, and makeitheir ears
heavy, and smear over their eyes; lest they see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and
turn again, and one heal them. 
 11 And I said, Until when, Lord? And he said, Until the cities
be wasted, without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and
the land be utterly desolate, 
 12 And the LORD removed men far away, and great be
the forsaken (tract) in the midst of the land. 
 13 And still in it (there is) a tenth, and it shall turn again, and
be for consuming: as a terebinth, and as an oak, whose stock is
in them when they are felled: a holy seed is the stock thereof. 
 VII. I And it came to pass the days of Ahaz the son of
Jotham, the son of Uaziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of
Aram, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up
toward Jerusalem to war against it, but succeeded not in warring
against it. 
 2 And it was told the house of David, saying, Aram rested 
 
 
 
 

 
 7 And he touched my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched
thy lips, and shall take away thy transgressions, and shall purify
thy sins. 
 8 And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom am I to
serial, and who will go to this people? And I said, Here am I;
sen me. 
 9 And he said, Go, and say to this people, By hearing ye shall
bear, and not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not
perceive. 
 10 For the heart of this people. is made fat, and with their
ears they hear dully, and their eyes have they closed; lest at any
time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
pgidrirstand with their heart, and should return, when I will heal
them. 
 11. And I said, Until when, Lord P And he said, Until cities be
desolated, because they are not inhabited, and houses, because
there are no men; and the land shall be left desolate. 
 12 And after this, God shall far remove men, and they that
are left shall be multiplied upon the earth. 
 13 And still upon it is the tenth part, and again it shall be for
plunder; as a terebinth, and as an oak, when it is torn from its
place. 
 VII. 1 And it came to pass, in the days of Ahaz the son of
Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, there went up Rezin
the king of Aram and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel,
against Jerusalem to war against it, and they were not able to
besiege it. 
 2 And it was reported to the house of David, saying, Aram
 
 
 
 

 
upon Ephraim. And his heart was shaken, and the heart of his
people, as the trees of the wood are shaken with the wind. 
 3 And the LORD said unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz,
thou, and Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the
upper pool in the highway of the fuller's ﬁeld; 
 4 And say unto him, Take heed, and be quiet; fear not,
neither be faint-hearted for these two tails of smoking firebrands.
for the fierce anger of Rezin with Aram, and of the son of
Remaliah. 
 5 Because Aram hath taken evil counsel against thee, Ephraim
and the son of Remaliah, saying, 
 6 Let us go up against Judah, and terrify it, and let us take it
by storm for ourselves, and set up a king in the midst of it, even
’ the son of Tabeal: 
 7 Thus saith the Lord GOD, It shall not stand, neither shall it
come to pass. 
 8 For the head of Aram is Damascus, and the head of
Damascus is Rezin; and within threescore and ﬁve years Vshall
Ephraim be broken, that it be not a people. 
 9 And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the-head of
Samaria is ’s son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall
not be established. 
 10 And the LORD spake again unto Ahaz, saying, 
 11 Ask thee a sign of the LORD thy God: ask, going deep or
mounting high. 
 
 
 
 

 
 hath made agreement with Ephraim; and his soul was distraught,
and the soul of his people, like as when a tree in a forest is shaken
with the wind. 
 3 And the Lord said unto Isaiah, Go forth to meet Ahaz, thou,
and he that is left, Jashub thy son, at the pool of the upper road
of the fuller's ﬁeld; 
 4 And thou shalt say to him, Take heed, that thou be quiet
and fear thou not, neither let thy soul be faint, at these two logs
of smoking firehrands; for when the anger of my wrath is come,
I will heal again. 
 5 And (as for) the son of Aram and the son of Remaliah,
because they have counselled evil counsel concerning thee, saying,
ἢ 6 We will go up against Judah, and let us talk with them, and
turn them away to us, and we will make king over them the son
of Tabeal: 
 7 Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, This counsel shall not abide,
neither shall it be. 
 8 But the head of Aram is Damascus, and the head of
Damascus is Rezin; but yet within threescore and ﬁve years shall
the kingdom of Ephraim fail from (being) a people. 
 9 And the head of Ephraim is. Samaria, and the head of
Samaria is ’s son: and if ye trust not, neither shall ye
understand. 
 10 And the Lord spake unto Ahaz, saying,
rr Ask thee a sign from the Lord thy God, (down) to the
depth or (up) to the height. 
 
 
 

 
 12 And Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the
LORD. 
 13 And he said, Hear ye now, house of David; is its too
little for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also? 
 14 Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold,
the is with child, and beareth a son, and shall call his name
Immanuel. 
 15 Butter and honey shall he eat, as he leameth to refuse the
evil, and choose the good. 
 16 For before the child learn to refuse the evil, and choose the
good, the land shall be forsaken, whose two kings thou fearest. 
 17 The LORD shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people,
and upon thy ’s house, days that have not come, from the
day that Ephraim departed from Judah; the king of Assyria. 
 18 And it shall be in that. day, that the LORD shall hiss to the
ﬂy that is at the end of the rivers of Egypt, and to the bee that is
in the land of Assyria. 
 19 And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the
precipitous valleys, and in the crevices of the rocks, and upon all
thorn bushes, and upon all pastures. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 12 And Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the
Lord. 
 13 And he said, Hear ye now, house of David; is it a small
thing for you to provoke men, and how are ye provoking the
Lord? 
 14 Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold,
the virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and
thou shalt call his name Immanuel. 
 15 Butter and honey shall he eat; before he learn to prefer
evil, he shall choose out what is good: 
 16 For before the child learn good or bad, (he resisteth wickedness
to choose out what is good,) the land which thou fearest
shall be abandoned from before them. 
 17 But God shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and
upon thy ’s house, days that have not yet come since the
day when he tdok away Ephraim from Judah; the king of the
Assyrians. 
 18 And it shall be in that day, the Lord shall hiss to the ﬂies,
that which ’ over a part of the river of Egypt, and to the bee
which is in the land of the Assyrians. 
 19 And they shall all come, and shall rest in the valleys of the
land, and in the holes of the rocks, and into the caverns, and into
every cleft, and upon every tree. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 20 In that day shall the LORD shave with the razor that is hired,
(which is) beyond the river, the king of Assyria; the head, and.
the hair of the feet, and the beard also shall it sweep away. 
 21 And it shall be in that day, that a man shall nourish a
heifer of kine, and two sheep; 
 22 And it sheu be, from the abundance of milk they give, he
shall eat butter; for butter and honey shall everyone eat, that is ’
left in the land. 
 23 And it shall be, in that day, that every place shall be, where
there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, it shall be
I for briers and thorns. 
 24 With arrows and with bows shall one come thither; because
all the land shall become briers and thorns. 
 25 And all the hills thatwere hoed with the hoe, thou shalt
not come hither for fear of briers and thorns; but it shall be for
the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of sheep. 
 VIII. 1 And the LORD said unto me, Take thee a great
’ and write upon it with a ’s pen, For Maher-shalal-
hash-baz. 
 2 And I will take unto me faithful witnesses to witness, Uriah
the priest and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah. 
 3 And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and
bare a son. Then said the LORD unto me, Call his name
Maher-shalal-hash-baz. 
 
 

 
 20 In that day shall theLord shave with the razor that is great
and drunken, which is beyond the river of the king of the
Assyrians; the head, and the hair of the feet, and the beard
shall he take away. 
 21 And it shall be in that day, a man shall nourish a heifer of
kine, and two sheep: 
 22 And it shall be, from their giving very much milk, butter
and honey shall everyone eat, that is left upon the land. 
 23 And it shall be, in that day, every place, wheresoever there
be a thousand vines at a thousand Shekels, they shall be for barren
land and thorn. 
 24 With arrow and bow shall they enter there; for barren and
thorn shall all the land be; 
 25 And every mountain shall be deeply ploughed; and fear
shall not come thither; for from the barren land and thorn it shall
be for the feeding of a sheep, and the treading of an ox. 
 VIII. I And the Lord said unto me, Take thee a leaf of
a new great sheet and write upon it with a ’s pen, (For)
to make speedily a plundering of spoils; for it is at hand. 
 2 And make faithful men my witnesses, Uriah, and Zechariah,
the son of Berechiah. 
 3 And he went in unto the prophetess; and she conceived,
and bare a son. And the Lord said to me, Call his name
Quickly spoil, speedily plunder: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 4 For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father,
and, My mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of
Samaria shall be taken away before the king of Assyria. 
 5 And the LORD spake also unto me again, saying, 
 6 Forasmuch as this people hath rejected the waters of
Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice with Rezin and ’s
son: 
 7 Now therefore, behold, the LORD bringeth up upon them
the waters of the river, strong and many, the king of Assyria,
and all his glory; and he shall come up over all his channels,
and go over all his banks: 
 8 And he shall sweep on into Judah; he shall overflow and
pass through; to the neck shall he reach, and the stretching out
of his wings shall ﬁll the breadth of thy land, Immanuel. 
 9 Rage, ye peoples, and be broken; and give ear, all distant
parts of the earth; gird yourselves, and be broken! gird yourselves,
and be broken! 
 10 Take counsel, and it shall come to nought; speak a word,
and it shall not stand; for God is with us. 
 11 For the LORD spake thus to me with strength. of hand,
and instructed me not to walk in the way of this people,
saying, 
 12 Say ye not, A conspiracy, of all whereof this people saith,
A conspiracy 3 and fear not the fear of it, nor be afraid: 
 13 The LORD of Hosts, him shall ye sanctify; and let him be
your fear, and let him be your dread. 
 

 
 4 For before the child learn to call father or mother, (one)
shall take the power of Damascus and the spoils of Samaria
before the king of the Assyrians. 
 5 And the Lord spake further unto me yet, 
 6 Because this people desire not the water of Siloam which
goeth quietly, but desire to have ’n and the son of Remaliah
for king over you: 
 7 Therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth upon you the ’s
water, that is strong and mighty, the king of the Assyrians and
his glory; and he shall go up upon every valley of yours, and
walk about upon every wall of yours. 
 8 And he shall take away from Judah (any) man who shall
be able to raise the head, if it be possible to accomplish aught:
and his camp shall be #x003C;so as to fill> the Wide spaces of thy
God (is) with us. 
 9. Learn, ye nations, and be overcome: ye shall hearken, unto
the end of the earth; when ye are waxed strong, be overcome;
I or if ye wax strong again, ye shall be overcome again. 
 10 And whatsoever counsel ye take, the Lord shall scatter it:
and whatsoever word ye speak, it shall not abide for you; for
the LOrd God is with us. 
 11 Thus saith the Lord God, With the strong hand do they
dispute the passage of the way of this people, saying, 
 12 Never speak ye stubbornly; for all that this people
speaketh is stubborn; but fear ye not the fear of it, nor be
confounded: 
 13 Sanctify the Lord himself; and he himself shall be your Fear. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 14 And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of
stumbling, and for a rock of offence, to both the houses of Israel,
for a and for. a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
 15 And many shall stumble upon them, and fall, and be
broken, and be snared, and be taken. 
 16 Bind thou up the testimony, seal the law among my
disciples. 
 17 And I will wait for the LORD, that hideth his face from
the house of Jacob; and will hope in him. 
 18 Behold, I and the children whom the LORD hath given
me are for signs and portents in Israel from the LORD of Hosts,
which dwelleth in mount Zion. 
 19 And when they shall say unto you, Inquire of the necromancers
and the wizards, that peep and that mutter; should not
a people inquire of its God? (should they inquire) of the dead
on behalf of the living? 
 20 To the law and to the testimony! if they speak not according
to this word, surely there is no dawn for him. 
 21 And he shall pass through it, hardly arid hungry;
and it shall be, when he shall be hungry, he shall fret himself,
and revile his king and his God, and shall face upward: 
 

 
 14 And if thou hast trusted ’in him, he shall be for a sanctuary
to thee; and ye shall not come upon him as a stumbling block
of a stone, nor as an offence of a rock. But the house of Jacob
(is) in a snare, and men that sit in Jerusalem in a hollow. 
 15 Therefore shall many among them be powerless, and shall
fall, and shall be crushed; and men that are in safety shall
draw near, and shall be taken. 
 16 Then shall they be manifest, who seal up the law, that
they should learn. 
 17 And he shall say, I will wait for God, that hath turned his
face from the house of Jacob, and will have my trust in him. 
 18 Behold me, and the children which God hath given me.
And they shall be for signs and wonders in Israel from the Lord
of Hosts, who dwelleth in the mount Zion. 
 19 And if they say unto you, Seek ye them that speak from
the earth, and the ventriloquists, the babblers that talk from the
belly: is it not a nation with its God? Why are they to seek
out the dead concerning the living? 
 20 For he hath given them a law for their help: that they
may speak not as this word, concerning which there is no giving
of gifts. 
 21 And there shall come upon you cruel famine; and it
shall be, when ye hunger, ye shall be grieved, and shall revile
your ruler, and your country's (laws); and they shall look up
to the heaven above, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 22 And he shall look unto the earth; and behold, trouble
and darkness, dimness of anguish; and into gloom is be driven
away. 
 IX. I Yet there is no darkness to her that had distress.
As at the ﬁrst he brought into contempt the land of Zabulon
and the land of Naphthali, so in the‘latter time he (hath)
brought honour to the way of the sea, beyond— Jordan, Galilee
of the nations. 
 2 The people that walk in darkness have seen a great light:
they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them
’ · hath the light shined. 
 3 Thou hast multiplied the nation, thou hast increased its
joyz’ they joy before thee like the joy in harvest, and as men
exult when they divide the spoil. 
 4 For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staﬂ’
of his shoulder, the rod of his exactor, as in the day of Midian. 
 5 For every boot of him that is booted with tumult, and the
cloke rolled in blood—it shall be for burning, for fuel of ﬁre. 
 6 For a child is born unto us, a son is given unto us; and
the government is upon his shoulder; and his name is called
Wonder, Counsellor, Mighty God, Father of Eternity, Prince
of Peace. ’ 
 
 
 

 
 22 And shall look unto the earth beneath; and behold,
affiction and straitening and darkness, strait dismay and darkness
that they see not. 
 And he that is in straitness shall not be dismayed until a season. 
 IX. I Drink this ﬁrst, do it quickly, country of Zabulon,
land of Naphthali, by the way of the sea, and the rest that
dwell by the sea shore and across Jordan, Galilee of the nations,
the parts of Judah. 
 2 people that sittest in darkness, see ye a great light; ye
that dwell in the land and in the shadow of death, a light shall
shine upon you. 
 3 The most part of the people, which thou broughtest back
in thy joy, shall even joy before thee as they that joy in harvest,
and like as they joy that divide spoils. 
 4 For the yoke that lay upon them shall be taken away, and
the rod that was upon their neck; for the Lord hath scattered in
pieces the rod of the exactors, as in the day that was upon Midian. 
 5 For every garment collected with guile, and cloke with
reconciling shall they repay, and they shall be willing, if they
had been burnt with ﬁre. 
 6 For a child is born unto us, a son also is given unto us,
upon whose shoulder was the government; and he shall call
his name Messenger of great counsel [Wonderful Counsellor,
Mighty, Powerful, Prince of Peace, Father of the Age to come]:
for I will bring peace upon the rulers, peace and health to him. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 7 To the increase of his government and to peace there is
no end, upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom, to
establish it and to sustain it with judgment and with righteous-
ness from henceforth and for ever. The jealousy of the LORD
of Hosts will do this. 
 8 The LORD sent a word into Jacob, and it shall fall upon
Israel. 
 9 And the whole people, they shall know, Ephraim and the
inhabitant of Samaria, that say in pride and stoutness of heart, 
 10 Bricks are fallen, and we will build with hewn stones;
sycamores are cut down, and we will change (them) forcedars. 
 11 Therefore the LORD hath set up the adversaries of Rezin
against him, and stirred up his enemies; 
 12 Aram before, and the Philistines behind: and they devoUr
Israelwith open mouth. For all this his anger is not turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still. 
 13 And the people hath not turned unto him that smiteth
them, neither have they sought the LORD of hosts. 
 14 And the LORD will cut off from Israel head and tail, palm
branch and rush, in one day. 
 15 The elder and honourable, he is the head: and the prophet
that teacheth lies, he is the tail. 
 16 And the leaders of this people cause them to err; and those
of them that are led are swallowed up. 
 17 Therefore the Lord shall not rejoice over its young men,
neither shall have mercy on its fatherless and widows; for every
one thereof is impious and an evil doer, and every mouth
speaketh folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, but
his hand is stretched out still. 
 
 

 
 7 Great is his rule, and of his peace there is no limit, upon
the throne of David, and his kingdom, to order it and to take
hold upon it in righteousness and in judgment from henceforth
and for ever; the jealousy of the Lord of hosts will do this. 
 8 The Lord sent death upon Jacob, and it came upon Israel. 
 9 And they shall learn, all the people of Ephraim and they
that sit in Samaria, saying, in pride and uplifted heart, 
 10 The bricks are fallen, but come, let us hew stones; and
let us cut down sycamines and cedars, and build ourselves a tower. 
 11 And God will smite them that rise up against mount Zion
against them, and will. scatter their enemies, 
 12 Syria from the sunrising, and the Greeks from the sunsetting;
them that devour Israel with open mouth. For all this
his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is still upraised. 
 13 And the people turned not back until it was smitten, and
they sought not out the Lord. 
 14 And the Lord hath taken away from Israel head and tail,
great and small, in one day; an elder, and respecters of persons;
this is the beginning, 
 15 And a prophet that teacheth transgressions; he is the tail. 
 16 And they that call this people happy shall be causing them
to err, and they cause them to err, that they may swallow them up. 
 17 Therefore God shall not rejoice over the young men, and
on their fatherless and widows shall he not have mercy; for
they are all transgressors and wicked, and every mouth ’peaketh
unjustly. For all this his wrath is not turned away, but his
hand is still upraised. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 18 For wickedness burned as a ﬁre: briers and thorns it
devoured, and it kindled the thickets of the forest, and they
were. whirled upward with a lifting-up of smoke. 
 19 With the wrath of the LORD of Hosts is the land turned
black, and the people are become as food for ﬁre; they spared
not a man his brother. 
 20 And one snatched on the right hand, and was hungry; and
ate on the left hand, and they were not satisfied: every man the
ﬂesh of his arm did they eat: 
 21 Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Mahasseh: they
together against Judah. For all this his anger is not turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still. 
 X. 1 Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and
to scribes that prescribe oppression: 
 2 To turn aside the weak from judgment, and to strip the
right from the poor of I my people, that widows may be their
spoil, and that they may prey on orphans. 
 3 And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the
ruin that cometh from far? to whom will ye ﬂee for help? and
where will ye leave your glory? 
 4 (Nought remains), but to crouch under the prisoners, and
fall under the slain. For all this his anger is not turned away,
but his hand is stretched out still. 
 5 Ah, Asshur, the rod of mine anger, and a staff is it in.
their hand, mine indignation. 
 6 I will send him against an impious nation, and against the
people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to spoil the spoil
and to prey on the prey, and to make them a treading down
like the mire of the streets. 
 
 

 
 18 And their. transgression shall burn as a ﬁre, and shall be
devoured by ﬁre like dry grass; and it shall burn in the thickets
of the forest, and shall eat up all that is round about the bills: 
 19 Because of the wrath of the anger of the Lord shall the
whole land be burned up, and the people shall be as though
utterly burned by ﬁre. A man shall not pity his brother, 
 20 But he shall turn aside to the right, because he shall be
hungry, and shall eat from the left, and shall not be satisfied:
eating (every) man the ﬂesh of his [brother's] arm. 
 21 For Manasseh shall eat of Ephraim, and Ephraim of
Manasseh; for together shall they besiege Judah. For all this
his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is still upraised. 
 X. r Woe to them that write wickedness; for they write,
and write wickedness, 
 2 Perverting the cause of beggars, and robbing the poor
among my people of their judgment, so that the widow serveth
them for spoil, and the fatherless for plunder. 
 3 And what will they do in the day of their visitation? for
the affliction come on you from far; and to whom will ye
ﬂee for help? and where will ye leave your glory, 
 4 That it fall not into captivity? And they shall fall under
the slain. For all this his wrath is not turned away, but his
hand is still upraised. 
 5 Ah, for the Assyrians; the rod of my wrath and of anger
(is) in their hands. 
 6 I dorsend mine anger against a transgressing nation, and to
my. people will I give a charge to take spoils and plunder, and
to tread down the cities and turn them to a dust cloud. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 7 And he, he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think
so; but it is in his heart to work destruction, and to cut off
nations not a few. 
 8 For he saith, Are not my princes altogether kings? 
 9 Is not Calno as Carchemish, or Hamath as Arpad, or
Samaria as Damascus? 
 10 As my hand hath found the kingdoms of the false—
and their images were more than Jerusalem and—
rr Shall I not, as I have done to Samaria and her false gods,
so do to Jerusalem and her offences? 
 12 And it shall be, when the Lord hath ﬁnished his whole
work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will visit upon the
fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria, and the glorying
of his loftiness of eyes. 
 13 For he saith, By the strength of my hand I have done it,
and by my wisdom, for I (can) discern: and I have removed the
bounds of peoples, and robbed their treasures, and brought down,
like a mighty one, them that ’enthroned: 
 14 And my hand hath reached, as a nest, the riches of
the peoples; and as one gathereth eggs that are left, have
I gathered all the earth; and there. was none that ﬂuttered
a wing, or opened a mouth, or peeped. 
 15 Shall the axe glory against him that heweth therewith?
Shall the saw magnify itself against him that plieth it? as if
a rod should ply them that lift it up, as if a staff should lift
up what is not wood. 
 16 Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, send among
his fat ones leanness; and under his glory there shall burn a
burning like the burning of ﬁre. 
 17 And the light of Israel shall be for a ﬁre, and his Holy
One for a ﬂame; and it shall burn and devour his thorns and
his briers in one day; 
 

 
 7 But he himself thought not thus, and not thus hath he
considered in his heart; but his mind shall change, even to
destroy nations not a few. 
 8 And if they say unto him, Thou alone art ruler, 
 9 Then shall he say, Did I not take the country above
Babylon, and Calno, where the tower was built? and I took
Arabia, and Damascus, and Samaria: 
 10 Like as I took these in my hand, I will also take all the
- countries. Wail, ye graven images in Jerusalem and in Samaria: 
 11 For like as I did to Samaria and the works of her hands,
so also will I do to Jerusalem and her idols. 
 12 And it shall be, when the Lord hath made an end of doing
all things in the mount Zion and in Jerusalem, he shall turn (his
hand) against the mighty mind, against the ruler of the Assyrians,
and upon the uplifting of the glory of his eyes. 
 13 For he said, By my strength will I do it, and <by
wisdom of my prudence> will I remove the boundaries of
and will plunder their strength. 
 14 And I will Shake inhabited cities, and the whole world will
I seize with my hand like a nest, and like eggs that are left will
I take them up; and there is none that shall escape me, or can
gainsay me. 
 15 Shall an axe be glorified, apart from him that smiteth with
it? or shall a saw be uplifted, apart from him that driveth it?
as if one should lift a rod or staff, and not thus? 
 16 But the Lord of Hosts shall send dishonour upon thine
honour, and burning ﬁre shall burn against thy glory. 
 17 And-the light of Israel shall be as a ﬁre, and he shall
sanctify it in burning ﬁre, and shall devour the wood as grass, 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 18 And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his
garden-land, from soul and even to. ﬂesh; and it shall be as
when a sick ’man pinetb away. 
 19 And the remnant of the trees of his forest shall be few,
and a child may write them. 
 20 And it shall be in that day, the remnant of Israel, and
such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again
lean upon him that smote them; but shall lean upon the Lord,
the Holy One of Israel, in truth. 
 21 The remnant shall return, the remnant of Jacob, unto the
Mighty God. 
 22 For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea,
a remnant (only) of it shall return; destruction is decided,
overﬂowing in righteousness. 
 23 For a destruction and a decision shall the Lord GOD of
Hosts make, in the midst of all the earth. 
 24 Therefore thus saith the Lord God of Hosts, Be not afraid,
my people that dwellest in Zion, of Asshur; though he smite
thee with a rod, and lift up his staff against thee, in the way
of Egypt. 
 25 For yet a very little while, and indignation shall be at an
end, and mine anger shall be to their destruction. 
 26 And the LORD of Hosts shall stir up a scourge against him
like the smiting of Midian at the rock Oreb ; and his rod is upon
the sea, and he lifteth it up, in the way of Egypt. 
 27 And it shall be in that day, his burden shall remove from
off thy shoulder, and his yoke from of? thy neck, and the yoke
shall be destroyed by reason of fatness. 
 28 He is come upon Aiath, he is passed through Migron; at
Michmash he layeth up his baggage; 
 
 

 
 18 In that day the mountains and the forests and the hills
shall be blotted out, and he shall devour them from the soul
to the ﬂesh; and he that ﬂeeth shall be as he that ﬂeeth from
burning ﬂame: 
 19 And they that are left from them shall be few, and a little
child shall write them. 
 20 And it shall be in that day, no longer shall the remnant
of Israel be added, and they that are saved of Jacob shall no
more put their trust in them that did them wrong, but they shall
put their trust in God, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.
2; And the remnant of Jacob shall be toward the mighty God. 
 22 And if the people of Israel become as the sand of the
sea, the remnant shall be saved; for (he is) fulfilling a word
and cutting it short in righteousness, 
 23 Because God shall perform a word (that is) cut short, in
the whole world. 
 24 Therefore thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Fear not, my
people, ye that dwell in Zion, because of the Assyrians; for
with a rod shall he smite thee; for I bring a stroke upon thee,
that thou mayest see the way of Egypt. 
 25 For yet a little, and the anger shall cease; but my wrath is
against their counsel. 
 26 And God shall stir (a stroke) against them, according
to the stroke of Midian, in a place of affliction; and his wrath
(shall be) at the way by the sea, toward the way by Egypt. 
 27 And it shall be in that day, the fear of him shall be taken
away from thee, and his yoke from 03 thy shoulder, and his yoke
shall be destroyed from off your shoulders. 
 28 For he shall come to the city of Aiath, 
 
 
 
 

 
 29 They pass through the pass: in Geba they make their
lodging; Ramah trembleth: Gibeah of Saul ﬂeeth. 
 30 Cry out with thy voice, O daughter of Gallim: listen,
Laishah; O thou poor Anathoth! 
 31 Madmenah wandereth away; the inhabitants of Gebim
gather (their goods) to ﬂee. 
 32 Within this very day he halteth at Nob, waving his hand
(at) the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem. 
 33 Behold, the Lord, the LORD of Hosts, shall lop the leafy
bough with terror; and the high ones of stature shall be hewn
down, and the haughty shall be humbled. 
 34 And he shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron,
and Lebanon shall fall by a majestic one. 
 XI. 1 And there shall come forth a shoot out of the stock
of Jesse, and a Branch out of his roots shall bear fruit; 
 2 And the Spirit of the LORD shall rest upon him, a spirit of
wisdom and discernment, a spirit of counsel and might, a spirit
of knowledge and of the fear of the LORD: 
 3 And he shall breathe in the fear of l the LORD: and he shall
not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither decide after the
hearing of his ears: 
 4 But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and decide
with equity for ’ meek of the earth: and he shall smite the
earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breather his lips
shall he slay the wicked. 
 5 And righteousness shall be the girdle of. his loins, and
faithfulness the girdle of his reins. 
 
 
 

 
 29 And shall pass over to Megiddo, and at Michmash shall
he set down his baggage; and he shall pass over a valley, and
shall come to Aiath; fear shall seize on Ramah, the city of Saul. 
 30 The daughter of Gallim shall ﬂee: one shall hear at 83, I
shall hear at Anathoth: 
 31 Madmenah shrank away, and the dwellers in Gebir. 
 32 Encourage her to day in the way to stay, encourage with
the hand the hill, the daughter of Zion, and ye hills that are in
Jerusalem. 
 33 For behold, the ruler, the Lord of Hosts, confoundeth the
glorious ones with might, and they that are uplifted in insolence
shall be crushed, and the uplifted ones shall be humbled 
 34 by the sword, and Lebanon with his uplifted ones shal
fall. 
 XI. 1 And there shall come forth a rod out of the root of
Jesse, and a blossom shall come up from his root. 
 2 And there shall rest upon him a spirit of God, a spirit of
wisdom and understanding, a spirit of counsel and might, a
spirit of knowledge and-of reverence; 
 3 A spirit of the fear of God shall ﬁll him; he shall not
judge according to the seeming, nor convict according to report, 
 4 But he shall judge judgment for the humble, and shall
convict the humble ones of the earth, and shall smite the earth
with the word of his mouth, and with the breath through his
lips shall he slay the impious man: 
 5 And he shall be girded with righteousness about his loins,
and bound with truth about ’his sides. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 6 And the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard
lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and
the fatling together; and a little child their leader. 
 7 And the cow and the bear shall graze: their young ones
shall lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. 
 8 And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp,
and the weaned child shall stretch his hand upon the ’s den. 
 9 They shall not do evil or deal corruptly in all my. holy
mountain; for the earth shall be ﬁlled with the knowledge of the
LORD, as the waters cover the sea. 
 10 And it shall be in that day; the root of Jesse, which
standeth for an ensign of the peoples, of him shall the nations
inquire: and his resting-place shall be glory. 
 11 And it shall be in that day, the Lord shall set his hand
again the second time to purchase the remnant of his people
which shall remain from ASsyria, and from Egypt, and from
Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and
from llamath, and from the isles of the sea. 
 12 And he shalllift up an ensign for the nations, and shall
gather the outcasts of Israel, and collect the dispersed of Judah
from the four corners of the earth. 
 13 And the jealousy of Ephraim shall remove, and the adversaries
of Judah shall be cut 06; Ephraim shall not be jealous
of Judah, and Judah shall not be adverse to Ephraim. 
 14 And they shall light upon the shoulder of the Philistines
toward the west; they shall spoil the children of the east to-
gether; Edom and Moab shall be the putting forth of their hand,
and the children of Ammon their obedience. 
 
 
 

 
 6 And the wolf shall graze with the lamb, and the leopard
shall rest with the kid, and the calf and the bull and the lion
shall graze together, and a little child shall lead them. 
 7 And the ox and the bear shall graze together, and their
young ones shall graze together, and they shall eat chaff together the lion and the ox. 
 8 And a young child shall lay his hand over the hole of asps,
and on the lair of the offspring of asps. 
 9 And they shall not do evil, neither shall they be able to
destroy any upon my holy mountain; for the whole (earth) is
ﬁlled with the knowledge of the Lord, as much water covereth
seas. 
 10 And in that day shall be the root of Jesse, and he that
standeth up to rule over nations; in him shall nations hope.
And his rest shall be honour. 
 11 And it shall be in that day, the Lord shall again show his
hand to be jealous for the remnant which is left of the people,
whatever be left from the Assyrians, and from Egypt, and Babylonia,
and Ethiopia, and from the Elamites, and from the rising
up of the sun, and from Arabia. 
 12 And he shall lift up a signal toward the nations, and shall
bring together them that are. perished of Israel, and them that
are scattered of Judah shall he bring together from the four
corners of the earth. 
 13 And the yoke of Ephraim shall be taken away, and the
enemies of Judah shall perish; Ephraim shall not envy Judah,
and Judah shall not afflict Ephraim. 
 14 And they shall ﬂy in ’ ships; they shall plunder
the sea together, and them from the rising of the sun, and Edom;
and upon Moab ﬁrst shall they lay their hands, and the children
of Ammon shall be ﬁrst to obey them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 15 And. the LORD shall lay under a ban the tongue of the
Egyptian sea; and with the violence of his wind shall he wave
his hand over the river, and shall smite it into seven streams,
and make men go over dryshod. 
 16 And there shall be a highway for the remnant of his
people, which shall remain from Assyria; as there was for Israel
in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt. 
 XII. I And in that day thou shalt say, O LORD, I will thank
thee; for thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away,
and thou comfortedst me. 
 2 Behold, God my salvation: I will trust, and not be afraid;
for JAH the LORD is my strength and song; and he is become my
salvation. 
 3 And ye shall draw water with joy out of the wells of-
salvation. 
 4 And in that day shall ye say, Give thanks to the LORD,
proclaim in his name, make known his deeds among the peoples,
make mention that his name is exalted. 
 5 Make music to the LORD, for he hath wrought excellence:
let this be known in all the earth. 
 6 Cry out and shout, thou inhabitress of Zion; for great is
the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee. I
XIII. r The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of
Amoz did see. 
 2 Lift ye up an ensign upon a bare mountain; raise (the
voice) unto them, wave the hand, that they may go into the
gates of the nobles. 
 
 
 

 
 15 And the Lord shall make the sea of Egypt desolate, and
shall lay his hand upon the river with a mighty wind, and shall
smite seven channels, so that he go over (dry) shod, 
 16 And there shall be a way for my people that are left in
Egypt; and it shall be to Israel as the day when he came out of
the land of Egypt. 
 XII. I And thou shalt in that day, I will praise thee,
Ο Lord, because thou wast angry with me, and didst turn away
thy wrath, and pitiedst me. 
 2 Behold, my God is my Saviour, I will trust in him, and
will not be afraid; for the Lord is my glory and my praise, and
he is become my salvation. 
 3 And ye shall draw water with joy out of the fountains of
salvation. 
 4 And thou shalt say in that day, Praise the Lord, cry his
name aloud, proclaim his glorious deeds among the nations;
make mention that his name is exalted. 
 5 Praise the name of the Lord, for he hath done exalted
deeds; proclaim this in all the earth. 
 6 Exult and rejoice, ye that dwell in Zion: for the Holy One
of Israel is exalted in the midst of thee. 
 XIII. I Vision which Isaiah the son of Amoz saw against
Bab lon. 
 2 Lift ye up a signal on a mountain in a plain, upraise your
voice to them, be] not afraid: encourage (them) in heart: open,
ye rulers. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 I, I have charged my consecrated ones, ’have also called
my mighty ones for mine anger, that exult in my excellence. 
 4 The voice of an uproar, like as of a great people; the voice
of a tumult of the kingdoms of nations gathered together; the
LORD of Hosts mustereth a host of war. 
 5 They come from a far country, from the end of the heavens;
the LORD, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the
whole earth. 
 6 Howl ye; for the day of the LORD ’is at hand; it shall come
as a destruction from the Almighty. 
 7 Therefore shall all hands be slack, and every ’s heart
shall melt, 
 8 And they shall be dismayed: pangs and sorrows shall take
hold of them; they shall writhe as a travailing woman; they shall
look aghast one at another: faces of ﬂame are their faces. 
 9 Behold, the ’day of the LORD cometh, cruel, and wrath and
ﬁerce anger, to make the earth a desolation, and he will destroy
the sinners thereof out of it. 
 10 For the stars of heaven, and the Orions thereof, shall not
give forth their light; the sun shall be dark at his going forth, and
the moon shall not cause her light to shine. 
 11 And I will punish the world for evil, and the wicked for
their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to
cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible. 
 12 I will make a man more precious than ﬁne gold, and man-
kind than the (pure) gold of. Ophir. 
 
 
 

 
 3 Ι marshal them, even I; they are sanctified, and I lead
them; giants come to fulfil my wrath, rejoicing and proud
together. 
 4 Α voice of many nations upon the mountains, like (the
voice) of many nations; a voice of kings and of nations gathered
together. The Lord of Hosts hath commanded an armed nation 
 5 To come from aland afar off, from the uttermost foundation
of heaven, the Lord and his armed men, to destroy the whole
world. 
 6 Wail ye: ’the day of the Lord is near; and a destruction
shall come from God. 
 7 Therefore shall every hand he slackened, and every heart
of man shall be faint: 
 8 And the old men shall be confounded, and pangs as of a
travailing woman shall have hold of them; and they shall lament
one with another, and shall be amazed, and shall change their
face as doth a ﬂame. 
 9 For behold, the day of the Lord cometh, and there is no
healing of its wrath and anger, to make the earth desolate, and to,
destroy the sinners out of it. 
 10 For the stars of heaven, and Orion, and all the order of
’ heaven shall not give their light; and it shall grow dark when
the sun ariseth, and the mobn shall not give her light. 
 11 And I will command evils upon the whole world, even
their own sins upon the wicked: and I will destroy the pride of
transgressors, and will humble the pride of the arrogant; 
 12 And they that are left shall be more precious than new gold;
and the man shall be more precious than the stone from Ophir. 
 
 
 
 

 
 13 Therefore will make the heavens tremble, and the earth
shall be disquieted from her place, at the wrath of the LORD of
Hosts, and in the day of the heat of his anger. 
 14 And it shall be as (with) a chased roe; and as sheep, and
there is none that gathereth; they shall every man turn to his
own people, and ﬂee everyone to his own land. 
 15. Everyone that is found shall be thrust through, and every-
one that is taken shall fall by the sword. 
 16 And their infants shall be dashed to pieces before their
eyes; their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished. 
 17 Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall
not regard silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight in it. 
 18 And bows shall dash youths in pieces; and they shall have
no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not have mercy
on children. 
 19 And Babylon, the beauty of kingdoms, the glory of the
pride of the Chaldees, shall be as ’s overthrow of Sodom
and Gomorrah. 
 20 It shall not inhabited for ever, neither shall it be dwelt
in from generation to generation; neither shall the Arabian pitch
tent there, neither shall shepherds make (flocks) to lie down
dwarf. But desert creatures shall lie there; and their houses shall
groaners ﬁll; and ostriches shall dwell there; and shaggy beasts
shall dance there. 
 22 And wolves shall howl in their castles, and jackals in
palaces ’of pleasure; and her time is near to come, and her
days shall not be prolonged. 
 XIV. r For the LORD will have compassion on Jacob, and
will yet (again) choose Israel, and set them on their own ground:
and the stranger shall join himself unto them, and they shall
cleave to the house of Jacob. 
 

 
 13 For the heaven shall be wroth, and the earth shall be
shaken from her foundations, because of the wrath of the anger
of the Lord of Hosts, in the day when his wrath cometh upon it. 
 14 And they that are left shall be as a roe that ﬂeeth, and as
a sheep that wandereth, and there shall be none that gathereth
them together, for each to return to his people; and each to haste
into his own land. 
 15 For whosoever is taken shall be overcome, and whosoever
are gathered together shall fall by the sword. 
 16 And they Shall dash their children down before their face,
and plunder their houses, and take possession of their wives. 
 17 Behold, I rouse up against you the Medes, who reckon
not silver, neither have they any need of gold. 
 18 They shall shatter the bows of the young men; and they
shall not have pity on your children, nor shall their eyes spare
your children. 
 19 And Babylon, which is called honourable by the king
of the Chaldeans, shall be, like as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah. 
 20 It shall not be inhabited for ever, nor shall they enter ’
it throughout many generations, nor shall the Arabians pass through
it, nor shall shepherds rest therein. 
 21 And wild beasts shall rest there, and houses shall be ﬁlled
with noise: and owls shall rest there, and demons shall dance
there. 
 22 And apes shall dwell there, and hedgehogs shall make their
nests in their houses. Quickly it comes, and will not linger. 
 xrv. 1 And the Lord shall have pity on Jacob, and will
yet choose out Israel, and they shall rest upon their own land;
and the stranger shall be added unto them, and shall be added
unto the house of Jacob. 
 
 
 

 
 2 And peoples shall take them, and bring them to their place
and the house of Israel shall take them as their possession upon
the ’s ground for servants and for handmaids; and they
shall be captors to their captors 3 and they shall rule over their
oppressors. 
 3 And it shall be in that day that the LORD giveth thee rest
from thy pain and thy disquiet, and from the hard bondage which
was laid upon thee, 
 4 That thou shalt take up this ’parable over the king Of
Babylon, and say, How hath the oppressor ceased, the insolence
ceased! 
 5 The LORD hath broken the staff of the the rod of
rulers, 
 6 Which smote peoples in wrath with a continual stroke, ruled
over nations in anger with a pursuit that none restrained. 
 7 The whole earth is at rest, is quiet; they break forth into
Singing. 
 8 Yea, the ﬁr trees rejoice at thee, the cedars of Lebanon,
(saying,) Since thou hast lain down, the feller cometh not up
against us. 
 9 Hell (from) beneath is disquieted for thee, to meet thee at
thy coming; it stirreth up the Shades for thee, all the chief ones
of the earth; ’ raiseth from their thrones all the kings of the
nations. 
 10 All they shall answer and say ’unto thee, Thou also art
made weak as we ἦ thou art made like unto us! 
 11 Thy pride is brought down to hell, the noise of thy viols;
the maggot is spread under thee, and the worm is thy covering. 
 

 
 2 And nations shall take them, and-bring them into their
place; and they shall make them to inherit it, and shall be
multiplied upon the land of God for bondmen and for bondwomen;
and they that did carry them into captivity shall be
captives, and they that were lords over them shall have them for
lords. 
 3 And it shall be in that day, God shall make thee to rest
from thy woe, and from thine indignation, and from thy hard
bondage with which thou servedst them. 
 4 And ’ shalt take up this lament upon the king of
Babylon, and say in that day, ’has the exactor ceased, and
the oppressor ceased! 
 5 God hath broken in pieces the yoke of the sinners, the yoke
of the rulers, 
 6 Smiting a nation in wrath, with a stroke that cannot be
healed; striking a nation a wrathful blow which ’spareth not, he
hath rested in confidence. 
 7 All the earth shouteth with joy, 
 8 And the trees of Lebanon rejoice over thee, and the cedar
of Lebanon, (saying,) Since thou hast lain down to sleep, there
hath not come up one that felleth us. 
 9 Hell from beneath is embittered on meeting thee; there
were roused up together for thee all the giants that did rule the
earth, that roused from their thrones all kings of the nations; 
 10 All shall answer and say to thee, Thou also art taken, as
we also were; and art reckoned among us. 
 11 But down to hell hath thy glory come, thy plentiful joy;
under thee shall they spread decay, and a worm is thy covering. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 12 How art thou fallen from heaven, Lucifer, son of the
dawn; how art thou hewn down to the ground, which didst lay
low the nations! 
 13 And thou, thou sajdst in thy heart, I will ascend the
heavens; I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; and I
will sit upon the mount of assembly, in the recesses of the north: 
 14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will
make myself like the most High. 
 15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the recesses of
the pit. 
 16 They that see thee shall look narrowly on thee, shall gaze
earnestly on thee: Is this the man that did disquiet the earth,
that made kingdoms tremble? 
 17 (That) made the world as a wilderness, and broke down the
cities thereof; that loosed not his prisoners homeward
18 All ’s of nations, all of them, have lain down in glory,
each in his house. 
 19 But thou art cast out away from thy sepulchre like a
rejected branch, clothed with the slain, that are thrust through
with the sword, that go down to the stones of the pit, like a
trampled carcase. 
 20 Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou
’destroyed thy land, slain thy people: the seed of evil doers
shall not be named, for ever. 
 21 Prepare for his sons (a place of) slaughter, for the iniquity
of their fathers; that they rise not up, and possess the earth, nor
ﬁll the face of the world with cities. 
 22 And I will rise up against them, saith the LORD of Hosts,
and cut off from Babylon name, and remnant, and issue, and
offspring: saith the LORD. 
 23 And I will make it a possession for the bittern, and pools
of water; and I will sweep it away with the besom of destruction,
’the LORD of Hosts. 
 
 

 
 12 How is Lucifer, that riseth early, fallen out of heaven!
he is crushed into the earth, that sent forth unto all the nations. 
 13 But thou saidst in thy heart, Up to heaven ‘will I go, above
the stars of heaven will I set my throne; I will sit on a high
mountain, above the high’hills toward the north, 
 14 I will go up above the clouds, I will be like the most High. 
 15 But now shalt thou go down’into hell, and into the foundations
of the earth. 
 16 They that see thee shall marvel at thee, and say, This is
the man that tortureth the earth, shaking kings, 
 17 He that maketh the whole world desolate, <and his cities
hath he destroyed,> those in (his) train hath he not loosed; 
 18 All the kings of the nations have lain down to rest in
honour, each one in his own house: 
 19 But thou shalt be cast forth upon the mountains, like a
loathed corpse; with many dead, that are thrust through with
swords, that go down to Hell. Even as a cloke smeared with
blood shall not be clean, 
 20 Even so‘neither shalt thou be clean, because thou didst"
destroy my land, and didst slay my peOple; thou shalt not abide,
no, not for ever, an evil seed. 
 21 Make ready thy children to be slaughtered for the sins of:
thy father} that they may not rise up, and inherit the earth, and .
ﬁll the earth with wars. 
 22 And I will rise against them, saith the Lord of Hosts, and Α
will destroy their name, and remnant, and seed: thus saith the
Lord. 
 23 And I will make Babylon desolate, for hedgehogs to dwell
’ there; and it shall come to nought; and I will make it a <pit>
of mire, unto destruction. 
 
 
 
 

 
 24 The LORD of Hosts hath- Sworn, saying, Surely as I have
planned, so shall it be, and as I have purposed, that shall stand: 
 25 To break Asshur in my land, and on my mountains I will
trample him; and his yoke shall remove from off them, and his
burden shall remove from off his shoulder. 
 26 This is the purpose which is purposed upon the whole
earth; and this the hand that is stretched out upon all the
nations. 
 27 For the LORD of Hosts hath purposed, and who shall
disannul it? and his is the outstretched hand, and who shall
turn it back? 
 28 In the year of the death of king Ahaz was this burden. 
 29 Rejoice not, Philistia, all. of thee, that the rod which smote
thee is broken: for out of the ’s root shall come forth a
viper, and its fruit a ﬂying fiery serpent. 
 30 And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy
shall lie down in security; and I will kill-thy root with. famine,
and he shall slay thy remnant. 
 31 Howl, gate; cry, city; melt away, Philistia, all of
thee; for there cometh from the north a smoke, and there is
no straggler in his ranks. 
 32 And what shall one answer the messengers of a nation?
That the LORD hath founded Zion, and in her shall the afflicted
of his ’e take refuge. 
 XV. 1 The burden of Moab. For in a night Ar of Moab
is laid waste, is destroyed; for in a night Kit- of Moab is laid
waste, is destroyed: 
 
 

 
 24 Thus saith the Lord of Hosts: As I have spoken, so shall
it be, and as I have counselled, so shall it abide, 
 25 To destroy the Assyrians from my land, and from my
mountains; and they shall be trodden down, and their yoke
shall be stripped from off them, and their renown shall be
stripped from off their shoulders. 
 26 This is the counsel which the Lord hath counselled against
the whole world, and this (is) his hand, which is upraised against
all the nations of the world. 
 27 For what God, the Holy, has counselled, who shall scatter?
and his hand, that is upraised, who shall turn away? 
 28 In the year that the king Ahaz died came this word. 
 29 May ye not rejoice, all ye strangers, for that the yoke of
him that smote you is broken; for from ’ seed shall come
forth the offspring of asps, and their offspring shall come forth,
ﬂying serpents. 
 30 And through him shall beggars feed, and beggar men shall
rest in peace; but he shall destroy thy seed with famine, and thy,
remnant shall he destroy. 
 31 Wail, ye gates of cities; let cities that are confounded cry
out, all ye strangers: for from the north a smoke cometh, and
there is no means to continue. 
 32 And what shall the kings of the nations answer? That
the Lord hath founded Zion, and through him shall the humble
among the people be saved. 
 XV. 1 The Vision against the land of Moab. 
 By night shall the land of Moab perish, for by night shall the
wall of the land of Moab perish. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 He is gone up to the house, and Dibon, the high places, to
weep; Moab howleth upon Nebo, and upon Medeba; on all his
heads (is) baldness, every beard cut off. 
 3 In his streets they are girded with sackcloth; on her roofs
and in her broad places all of her howleth, running down with
weeping. 
 4 And Heshbon crieth, and Elealeh; their voiCe is heard unto
Jahaz; therefore the armed men of Moab cry out; his soul
trembleth within him. 
 5 My heart crieth out for Moab; her bars reach unto Zoar;
a heifer of three years old: for the ascent of Luhith, with
weeping doth he go up by it; for in the way of Horonaim
they raise a cry of destruction. 
 6 For the waters of Nimrim are desolations; the grass is
withered, the herbage is consumed, there is no green thing. 
 7 Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and their treasure,
shall they carry away over the brook of willows. 
 8 For the cry is gone round about the borders of ’ Moab;
her howling (hath reached) unto Eglaim, and to Beer-elim her
howling. 
 9 For ’waters of Dimon are full of blood; forI will bring
more upon Dimon, a lion for the escaped of Moab, and for the
remnant of the land. 
 XVI. r. Send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land, from
Sela toward the wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of
Zion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 Grieve ye for yourselves; for Dibon also shall perish, where
your altar is; there shall ye go up to weep, upon Nebo of the
land of Moab. Wail: (let there be) baldness on every head, all
arms cut in pieces. 
 3 In her highways gird yourselves with sackcloth, and smite
yourselves on her housetops and in her highways and in her
streets; wail, ’of-you, with weeping. 
 4 For Heshbon hath cried aloud, and <Elealeh>; until
voice was heard; therefore the loins of the land of Moab cry out,
her heart shall learn. 
 5 The heart of the land of Moab crieth aloud within her unto
Zoar; for she is (as) a heifer of three years old; and on the
ascent of Luhith shall they go up weeping unto thee, by the way
of Horonaim; destruction crieth out, and an earthquake; 
 6 The water of Nimrim shall be desolate and the grass thereof
shall fail; for there shall be no green grass. 
 7 Is she like to be saved, even thus? for I will bring (the)
Arabians upon the valley, and they shall take it. 
 8 For the cry hath reached the mountain of the land of Moab,
Of Eglairn, and her wailing unto the well of Elim. 
 9 But the waters of Dimon shall be ﬁlled with blood; for I
’will bring (the) Arabians upon Dimon, and I will remove the
seed of Moab, and Ariel, and the remnant of Adamah. 
 XVI. r I will send as it were creeping things upon the earth:
is the mount of Zion a desolate rock? 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 And it shall be, like wandering birds, a scattered nest, shall
the daughters of Moab be at the fords of Arnon. 
 3 Apply counsel, execute a decision; make thy shadow as the
night in the midst of the noonday; hide outcasts; discover not
him that wandereth. 
 4 Let the outcasts of Moab dwell with thee; be thou a hiding
place to them from the face of the destroyer; for the extortioner
is brought to an end, destruction is ﬁnished, the trampler is
consumed out of the land. 
 5 And a throne is established in mercy, and one shall sit upon
it in truth in the tent of David, judging, and seeking judgment,
and swift to do righteousness. 
 6 We have heard of the pride of Moab, proud ekceedingly;
his proudness, and his pride, and his wrath; not so are his
boastings. 
 7 Therefore Moab shall howl for Moab, altogether shall he
howl; for the raisin cakes of Kir-haresheth shall ye mourn, utterly
smltten. 
 8 For the ﬁelds of Heshbon languish; the vine of Sibmah, the
lords of nations struck down her choice plants; they reached
unto Jazer, they strayed into the wilderness; her offshoots spread
abroad, they went over the Sea. 
 9 Therefore I will weep with theweeping of Jazer (for) the
vine of Sibmah; I will water thee with my tears, OHeshbon and
Elealeh; for on thy summer fruit and on thy harvest shouting is
fallen. 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 For thou shalt be as a nestling taken away, when a bird
ﬂieth up, daughter of Moab: against thee, Amon, yet further 
 3 Take counsel, and make a shelter from trouble for thyself
continually; in midday darkness they ﬂee, they are amazed;
(see) lest thou be an exile. 
 4 The exiles shall sojourn <with thee> Moab; for they shall
be a shelter to you from the face of a pursuer; for thine alliance
is taken away, misery is fulfilled, and the ruler is perished that
did trample upon the earth. 
 5 And a throne shall be established with mercy, and he shall
sit upon it with truth in the tabernacle of David, judging, and
seeking out judgment, and hasting righteousness. 
 6 We have heard of the pride of Moab; very proud is he;
thou hast up his haughtiness. Not thus is thy prophesying,
not thus. 
 7 Moab shall wail; fOr in the land of Moab shall all wail;
thou shalt take care for them that dwell in Deseth, and shalt not
regard them. 
 8 The plains of Heshbon shall mourn, and the vine of Sibmah;
swallowing up the nations, tread ye down her vines, unto Jazer;
ye shall not reach, nor wander in the wilderness; they that
were sent forth were forsaken; for they crossed over the
desert. 
 9 Therefore will I weep as the weeping of Jazer, for the vine ’
of Sibmah; he cast down thy trees, Heshbon, and <Elealeh>;
upon thy harvest and thy vintage will I tread, and all shall fall. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 10 And taken away is joy, and gladness, from the garden
land; and iri the vineyards there is no singing, no calling; the
treader treadeth no wine in the presses; I have made shouting
to cease. 
 11 Therefore my bowels shall sound like the harp for Moab,
and mine inward. parts for Kir-hares. 
 12 And it shall be, when Moab hath appeared, when he hath
wearied himself upon the high place, and entereth his sanctuary
to pray, (then) he shall not prevail. 
 13 This is the word that the LORD hath spoken concerning
Moab hitherto: 
 14 And now the LORD hath spoken, saying: Within three
years, as the years of a hireling, and the glory of Moab shall be
brought into contempt, with all the great multitude; and the.
remnant shall be small, little, not strong. 
 XVII. r The burden of Damascus. 
 Behold, Damascus is removed from (being) a city, and be-
cometh a heap, a ruin. 
 2 The cities of Aroer are forsaken: they shall be for ﬂocks,
and they shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid. 
 3 And the fortress shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom
from Damascus, and the remnant of Aram: they shall be as the
glory of the children of Israel, saith the LORD of Hosts. 
 4 And it shall be in that day, the glory of ’Jacob shall be made
thin, and the fatness of his ﬂesh shall wax lean. 
 

 
 10 And joy shall be removed, and exultation, from thy vineyards,
and in thy vineyards shall they not rejoice; and they shall
not tread wine into the vats, for it is ceased. 
 11 Therefore my belly shall sound as a harp upon Moab, and
’ mine inward-parts like a wall which thou didst newly build. 
 12 And it shall be, as to thy paying reverence, Moab is grown
weary at the altars, she shall also enter in unto the works of
hands so as to. pray, and shall not be able to deliver him. 
 13 This (is) the word that the Lord spake concerning Moab,
what time he also spake. 
 14 And now I say, Within three years, of the years of a hireling,
shall the glory of Moab be dishonoured with all (his) much
wealth, and shall be left very small and not honourable. 
 XVII. I The word against Damascus. 
 Behold, Damascus shall be removed from (among) cities, and
shall become a ruin, 
 2 Deserted for ever, for a place for ﬂocks to lie down and herds
to rest, and there shall be none that chaseth them. 
 3 And no longer shall it be strong, for Ephraim to take refuge;
and no longer there be a kingdom in Damascus, and the
remnant of the Syrians: for thou art not better than the sons
of Israel, and their glory. 
 4 Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, There shall be in that day
a failing of the glory of Jacob, and the fat things of his glory
shall be shaken. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 And it shall be as when the harvestman graspeth the standing
Corn, and his arm reapeth the ears 3 and it shall be as one that
gleaneth ears in the valley of Rephaim. 
 6 And there shall be left therein gleanings, as at the beating of
an olive tree, two or three berries at the top of a crest, four or ﬁve
in the fruit ’s branches, saith the LORD God of Israel. 
 7 In that day shall (a) man look toward -his Maker, and his
eyes shall gaze upon the Holy One of Israel. 
 8 And he shall not look to the altars, the work of his hands,
neither shall gaze upon what his ﬁngers made, either the Asherim
or the sun-images. 
 9 In that day shall his strong cities be as the forsaken tract of
-the woodland and the mountain crest, which men forsook from
before the children of Israel 5 and there shall be a desolation. 
 10 For thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, and hast
not been mindful of the rock of thy strength; therefore thou
plantest plants of pleasantness, and settest them with slips of a
stranger; 
 11 In the day of thy planting dost thou make a hedge, and in
the morning thou makest thy seed to bud; a harvest heap in the
day; of pain and deadly sorrow. 
 12 Ah, the uproar of many peoples, they roar like the roaring
of seas; and the tumult of nations, they are tumultuous like the
tumult of mighty waters l 
 13 Nations are tumultuous like the tumult of many waters; and
(one) rebuketh him, and he ﬂeeth afar off, and is chased as the
chaff of the mountains before the wind, and as whirling dust before
the tempest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 And it shall be like as if one gather a standing harvest, and
reap the seed of ears of corn with his arm; and it shall be like as
if one gather an ear of corn in a barren valley, 
 6 And there be left in it a stalk, or as it were olive berries,
two or three on high in the air, or four or ﬁve upon the branches
thereof. Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel. 
 7 In that day shall a man trust in him that made him, and his
eyes shall look unto the Holy One of Israel. 
 8 And they shall not trust in their altars, nor in the works of
their hands, which their ﬁngers made; and they shall not look
upon their groves, nor their abominations. 
 9 In that day shall thy cities be abandoned, like as the Amorites
and the Hivites abandoned them from before the children of
Israel; and they shall be desolate. 
 10 Because thou didst abandon God thy Saviour, and τε·
memberedst not the Lord thy helper. Therefore shalt thou plant
an unfaithful plant, and an unfaithful seed. 
 11 But in the day when thou plantest it, thou shalt wander;
and in the morning if thou sowest, it shall blossom to harvest, in
whatsoever day thou shalt obtain it; and like a ’s father, thou
shalt obtain it for (thy) sons. 
 12 Woe, the multitude of many nations: as a billowy sea, so
shall ye be confounded, and the surface of many nations shall
sound as water 
 13 As much water are many nations, as when much water is
violently borne along; and he shall cast him off, and pursue him
afar, as the dust Of chaff when men winnow before the wind, and
like a whirlwind carrying along a circling dust cloud. I 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 14 At eventide, and behold terror; before the morning, he is
not. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them
that rob us. 
 XVIII. I Ah, land of the rustling of wings, whichart beyond
the rivers of Cush ! 
 2 That sendest envoys on the sea, and in vessels of papyrus on
the face of the waters: Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation tall
and polished, to a people terrible since it was and onward, a
nation of line, line, and treading down, whose land the rivers
divide. 
 3 All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth,
when a standard is lifted up on (the) mountains, see ye: and
when a trumpet is blown, hear ye. 
 4 For so the Lord said unto me: I will be quiet, and I will
behold in my dwelling place, while there is clear heat upon the
light, a mist-cloud in the heat of harvest. 
 5 For afore the harvest, when the blossom is over, and the
ﬂower becometh a ripening grape-bunch, he shall cut off the sprigs
with pruning hooks, and remove and cut down the branches. 
 6 They shall be left together unto the bird of prey of the
mountains, and to the beasts of the earth; and the bird-of prey
shall summer upon it, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter
upon it. 
 7 In that time shall a present be brought unto the Lord of
Hosts, a people tall and polished, and from a people terrible since
it was and onward: a nation of line, line, and treading down,
whose land the rivers divide: unto the place of the name of the
Lord of Hosts, mount Zion. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 14 Toward evening there shall be trouble: before morning,
and he shall not be; this is the portion of them that plundered
you, and the share for them that shared you. 
 XVIII. 1 Ah, the wings of the ships of the land, beyond
the rivers of Ethiopia; 
 2 He that sendeth forth hostages upon the sea, and letters on
papyrus above the water. For swift messengers shall go to a
nation that is high, and a stranger people and a cruel; (what is
beyond it?) a nation not looked for, and trodden down. Now ’
(as for) the rivers of the land 
 3 All of them, like as an inhabited land shall their land be
inhabited; like as if a signal were raised from a mountain, like
the voice of a trumpet shall it be heard. 
 4 For thus said the Lord to me, There shall be safety in my
city as the light of midday heat, and as a cloud of dew in a day
of harvest shall it be. 
 5 Before the harvest, when the blossom is perfect, and the sour ’
grape hath put forth its blossom; then shall he take away the
little clusters with pruning hooks, and shall take away the sprigs and cut them off. 
 6 And shall leave them together for the fowls of the heaven
and the beasts of the earth ; and the fogls of the heaven shall be
gathered together unto them, and all the beasts of the earth shall
come unto him. 
 7 At that time shall presents be brought to the Lord of Hosts
from a people crushed and torn, and from a people great from
henceforth and for ever; (it is) a nation hoping, and trodden
down, which is in the portion of the river of its land : to the place
where is the name of the Lord of Hosts, the mount Zion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 XIX. The burden of Egypt. 
 1 Behold, the Lord rideth upon a swift cloud, and cometh to
Egypt; and the false gods of Egypt shall shake at his presence,
and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it. 
 2 And I will stir up Egypt against Egypt, and they shall ﬁght
everyone against his brother, and everyone against his neighbour;
city against city, kingdom against kingdom. 
 3 And the spirit of Egypt shall be made empty in the midst
of it; and I will swallow up the counsel thereof; and they shall
inquire of the false gods, and the mutterers, and them that have
familiar spirits, and the wizards. 
 4 And I will confine Egypt into the hand of a hard lord; and
a harsh king shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the Lord of
Hosts. 
 5 And the waters shall waste fromthe sea, and the river shall
be parched and dried up. 
 6 And the rivers shall stink, the canals of Mazor are emptied
and parched up ; reed and ﬂag wither. 
 7 The meadows by the Nile, by the brink of the Nile, and
every sown ﬁeld by the Nile, shall dry up, be driven away, and
be no more. 
 8 And the ﬁshers shall sigh, and all they that cast angle into
the Nile shall mourn, and they that spread nets upon the face
of the waters shall languish. 
 9 And they that work combed ﬂax, and they that weave white
cloth, shall be ashamed. 
 6. ‘canals’: lit. Niles (Nile-arms): Mazor, a rare singular form of
Mizraim, Egypt: the word prob. meaning ‘fortiﬁcation.’ 

 
 XIX. A vision of Egypt. 
 1 Behold, the Lord sitteth upon a swift cloud, and shall
come to Egypt, and the works of ’s hands shall be shaken
from before him, and their hearts shall be discomfited within
them. 
 2 And Egyptians shall rise up against Egyptians, and shall war
each against his brother and each against his neighbour, and city
shall rise up against city, and province against province. 
 3 And the spirit of the Egyptians shall be confounded within
them, and I will scatter their counsel, and they shall inquire of
their gods and their images, and of them that speak from the
earth, and of the ventriloquists, and the diviners. 
 4 And I will give Egypt over into the hands of men, harsh
lords; and harsh kings shall lord it over them. Thus saith the
Lord of Hosts. 
 5 And the Egyptians shall drink the water that is. beside the
sea, and the river shall fail, and be dried up. 
 6 And the rivers and the trenches of the river shall fail, and
every gathering together of water shall be dried up, and (the water)
in every marsh of reed and rush, 
 7 And the green meadow-grass, all that is round about the
river, and all that which is sown about the river, shall be dried up,
blasted by the wind. 
 8 And the ﬁshers shall mourn, and all they that cast hook into
the river shall mourn, and they that cast nets, and the ﬁshermen
shall grieve. 
 9 And shame shall seize on them that work the carded ﬂax, and
them that work the linen. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 10 And her pillars shall be broken in pieces ; all that work for
hire (shall be) grieved in soul. 
 II Merely fools are the princes of Zoanf as for the wise
counsellors of Pharaoh, counsel is become brutish; how can ye
say unto Pharaoh, I am a son of the wise, a son of ancient
kings? 
 12 Where, then, are thy wise men? (and) let them declare now
unto thee, and let them know, what the Lord of Hosts hath purposed
upon Egypt. 
 13 The princes of Zoan are befooled, the princes of Noph are
deceived: they have led Egypt astray, the cornerstone of her
tribes. 
 14 The Lord hath mingled a spirit of perverseness in the midst
of her; and they have led Egypt astray in all his work, as a
drunkard strays in his vomit. 
 15 Neither shall there be a work for Egypt, whichihead or tail,
palm branch or rush, can do. 
 16 In that day shall Egypt be as women, and shall tremble
and fear before the face of the waving of the hand of the Lord
of Hosts, which he waveth over it. 
 17 And the land of Judah shall be for a terror to Egypt; whosoever
maketh mention of it, unto him they turn in fear, before
the purpose of the LORD of Hosts, which he purposeth
concerning it. 
 18 In that day shall there be ﬁve cities in the land of Egypt
speaking the language of Canaan, and swearing to the Lord of
Hosts; one shall be called, City of destruction. 
 
 
 

 
 10 And they that <weave> them shall be in pain, and
that make strong drink shall be. grieved, and shall afflict their
souls, 
 11 And the rulers of Tanis shall be fools; the wise counsellors
of the king, their counsel shall be turned to foolishness. How
will ye say to the king, We are sons of men of understanding, sons
of kings which were from the beginning? 
 12 Where are now thy wise men? let them even proclaim to
thee, and let them tell, what the Lord of Hosts hath purposed
upon Egypt. 
 13 rulers of Tanis have failed, and the rulers of
are uplifted: and they shall make Egypt to wander in her
tribes. 
 14 For the Lord hath mingled for them a spirit of wandering, and
they have made Egypt to wander in all their works, as wandereth
the drunken man, and he that vomiteth, together. 
 15 And there shall be no work for the Egyptians which shall
make head or tail, beginning or end. 
 16 But in that day shall the Egyptians be like women, in fear
and trembling, before the face of the hand of the Lord of Hosts,
which he shall lay upon them. 
 17 And the land of the men of Judah shall be a (cause of)
terror to the Egyptians; everyone, whosoever maketh mention of
it to them, they shall be afraid, because of the counsel of the Lord
of Hosts, which the Lord hath counselled against it. 
 18 In that day shall there be ﬁve cities in Egypt speaking in the
language of Canaan, and swearing in the name of the Lord; the
one city shall be called, City of Asedek. 
 
 
 
 

 
 19	In that day shall there be an altar to the Lord in the
midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar near the border of it to
the Lord. 
 20	And it shall be for a sign and a witness unto the Lord of
Hosts in the land of Egypt: for they shall cry unto the Lord
because of (the) oppressors, and he shall send them a saviour, and
a mighty one, and shall deliver them. 
 21	And the Lord shall make himself known to Egypt, and the
Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall serve with
sacrifice and (meal) offering; and they shall vow a vow unto the
Lord, and perform it 
 22	And the Lord shall smite Egypt, smiting, and healing: and
they shall return unto the Lord, and he shall (let himself) be
intreated of them, and shall heal them. 
 23	In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria;
and Assyria shall come into Egypt, and Egypt into Assyria, and
the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians.
14 In that day shall Israel be a third to Egypt and Assyria,
a blessing in the midst of the earth ; 
 25 Forasmuch as the Lord of Hosts hath blessed him, saying,
Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands,
and mine inheritance, Israel. 
 XX. 1 In the year that the Tartan came unto Ashdod,
(when Sargon king of Assyria sent him,) and fought against
Ashdod, and took it: 
 2 At that timi spake the Lord by Isaiah the son of Amoz,
saying, Go, and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and pull
off thy shoe from thy foot And he did so, going naked and
barefoot. 
 
 

 
 19 In that day shall there be the altar to the Lord in the
Egyptians’ land, and a pillar at its boundary to the 
 20 And it shall be for a sign for ever to the Lord in the land of
Egypt; for they shall cry unto the Lord because of them that
oppress them, and the Lord shall send them a man, who shall save
them: he shall judge and save them. 
 21 And the Lord shall be known to the Egyptians; and the
Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall offer sacrifices
and shall make vows to the Lord, and render them. 
 22 And the Lord shall smite the Egyptians with a great stroke,
and heal them with a healing; and they shall turn unto the Lord,
and he shall hear them, and shall heal them. 
 23 In that day shall there be a way from Egypt to the
Assyrians, and the Assyrians shall enter into Egypt; and the
Egyptians shall go unto the Assyrians, and the Egyptians shall
serve the Assyrians. 
 24 In that day shall Israel be a third among the Assyrians and
among the Egyptians, blessed in the land 
 25 Which the Lord of Hosts (hath) blessed, saying, Blessed is
my people that is in Egypt and among the Assyrians, and. the
land of mine inheritance, Israel. 
 XX. 1 In the year when Tartan came to Azotus, when he
was sent by Sargon king of the Assyrians, and warred against
Azotus and. took it, 
 2 Then spake the LORD to Isaiah, saying, Go, and take off the
sackcloth from thy loins, and loose thy shoes from thy feet, and so
do, walking naked and barefoot. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 And the Lord said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath gone
naked and barefoot, three years a sign and a portent upon Egypt
and upon Cush: 
 4 So shall the king of Asshur lead the captives of Egypt and
the exiles of Cush, young and old, naked and barefoot, and with
buttocks uncovered, the nakedness of Egypt. 
 5 And they shall be dismayed and ashamed because of Cush
their expectation and Egypt their glorying. 
 6 And the inhabitant of this isle shall say in that day, Behold,
thus is our expectation, whither we tied for help, to be delivered
from the face of the king of Asshur; and how shall we, we,
escape? 
 xxx. 1 The burden of the desert of the sea;
Like whirlwinds in the south, sweeping along; it cometh from
the wilderness, from a terrible land. 
 2 A hard vision is declared unto me: the treacherous dealer
dealeth treacherously, and the destroyer destroyeth. Go up,
Ο Elam: besiege, O Media; all the sighing thereof have I made
to cease. 
 3 Therefore my loins are ﬁlled with anguish ; pangs have taken
hold upon me, like the pangs of a woman in travail; I am bowed
with pain, so that I cannot hear; I am dismayed, so that I
cannot see. 
 4 My heart wandereth, horror affrighteth me; the twilight of
my desire hath he turned into trembling for me. 
 5 They prepare the table, they set the watch, eat, drink. Arise,
ye princes, anoint the shield. 
 5. Verbs in former part of verse are ﬁnitives. ‘set the watch’:
‘spread the carpets. 

 
 3 And the, Lord said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked
naked and barefoot, three years there shall be signs and wonders
to the Egyptians and Ethiopians. 
 4 For thus shall the king of the Assyrians lead away the captivity
of Egypt and of the Ethiopians, young men and old men, naked
and barefoot, uncovered, the shame of Egypt. 
 5 And the Egyptians shall be ashamed and discomfited concerning
the Ethiopians, upon whom the Egyptians had trusted,
who were their glory. 
 6 And they that dwell in this isle shall say, Behold, we had
trusted to ﬂee unto them for help, who could not be saved from
the king of the Assyrians; and how shall we be saved? 
 XXI. 1 The vision of the desert. 
 As a tempest passeth through the desert, coming from a desert,
from the land. Fearful 
 2 Is the vision, and hard, that was proclaimed to me. He that
setteth at nought doth set at nought, and he that transgresseth
doth transgress. 
 The Elamites are upon me, and the envoys of the Persians
are coming against me. Now will I mourn, and will comfort
myself. 
 3 Therefore are my loins ﬁlled with faintness, and pangs have
taken hold of me, as her that travaileth- ; I did wrong, so as not to
hear, I laboured earnestly so ’ not to see. 
 4 My heart wandereth, and my transgression overwhelmeth me;
my soul turneth to fear. 
 5 Prepare the table, eat, drink ; stand up, ye rulers, and prepare
shields. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 6 For thus bath the Lord said unto me, Go, place the watchman;
what he shall see, let him declare. 
 7 And he saw a troop, horsemen in pairs, a troop of asses, a troop
of camels; and he hearkened with utmost hearkenings. 
 8 And he cried (as) a lion, O Lord, I stand continually upon
the watchtower by day, and I am placed at my post all the
nights: 
 9 And behold there cometh a troop of men, horsemen in
pairs; and he answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen;
and all the (graven) images of her gods he hath broken unto the
ground. 
 10 O my threshing, and the son of my (threshing) ﬂoor; that
which I have heard from the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel,
have I declared unto you. 
 11 The burden of Dumah. 
 One crieth to me out of Seir: Watchman, what (hour) of the
night? Watchman, what (hour) of the night? 
 12 The watchman said, Morning cometh, and also night. If ye
will inquire, inquire ye; return, come. 
 13 The burden upon Arabia. 
 In the forest in Arabia shall ye lodge, ye caravans of Dedanim. 
 14 Bring ye water, to meet him that is thirsty; the inhabitants
of the land of Tema welcome the fugitive with his bread. 
 15 For they are fugitives from the face of the swords, from the
face of the drawn sword, and of the bent bow, and of the weight
of war. 
 16 For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Within a year, as
the years of a hireling, and all the glory of Kedar shall be
consumed; 
 
 
 
 

 
 6 For thus saith the Lord to me, Go, set thee a watchman, and
whatsoever thou seest, tell it. 
 7 And I saw two mounted horsemen, one mounted on an ass,
and one mounted on a camel. Hear with diligent hearing, 
 8 And call Uriah to the watch tower of the Lord. And he
said, I have stood continually by day, and over the camp I stood
the whole night, 
 9 And behold, he himself cometh, mounted on a two-horse
chariot. And he answered and said, Babylon is fallen: and all her
images and the works of her hands are crushed into the earth. 
 10 Hear, ye that are left, and are in anguish, hear what I have
heard from the Lord of Hosts: the God of Israel hath proclaimed
it to us. 
 The vision of Idumæa 
 11 To me ye call from Seir, Watch ye (the) battlements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 17 And the remnant of the number of bows, the mighty men
of the sons of Kedar, shall be few; for the Lord, the God of
Israel, hath spoken it. 
 XXII. The burden of the valley of vision. 
 I What aileth thee, then, that thou art gone up, all of thee, to
the house tops? 
 2 She is ﬁlled with tumult, an uproarious city, a jubilant
town; thy smitten ones are not smitten with the sword, nor dead
in battle. 
 3 All thy rulers are fled together; without the bow they are
made captive; all that are found of thee are made captive, they
ﬂed afar off 
 4 Therefore I said, Look away from me, I will weep bitterly;
press not to comfort me, for the destruction of the daughter of my
people. 
 5 For the Lord God of Hosts hath a day of discomfiture, and
treading down, and perplexity, in the valley of vision; digging
down the wall, and a cry (goeth) to the mountain. 
 6 And Elam bare a quiver, with troops of men and horsemen,
and Kir uncovered the shield. 
 7 And it cometh to pass, thy choice valleys are full of chariots,
and the horsemen set themselves in array at the gate. 
 8 And he removed the covering of Judah, and thou didst look
in that day to the armour of the house of the forest. 
 9 And ye saw the breaches of the city of David, that they
were many; and ye gathered together the waters of the lower
pool 
 10 And ye numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses
did ye break down to fortify the wall. 
 
 

 
 17 And the remnant of the bows of the strong sons of Kedar
shall be few; for the Lord, the God of Israel, hath spoken it. 
 XXII. The vision of the valley of Zion. 
 1 What hath befallen thee now, that ye are all gone up to vain
houses ? 
 2 The city is ﬁlled with men shouting; thy smitten ones are not
smitten with the sword, nor thy dead men dead in war. 
 3 All thy rulers are ﬂed; and they that are taken have been
cruelly bound, and the strong ones in thee are ﬂed far away. 
 4 Therefore I said, Let me go, I will weep bitterly; persist not
to comfort me, for the blow of the daughter of my race. 
 5 For it is a day of confusion and destruction, and of trampling
down, and a wandering from the Lord of Hosts; in the valley of
Zion they wander, from small to great they wander (on) to the
mountains. 
 6 And the Elamites took quivers; mounted men upon horses,
and a gathering of an array. 
 7 And there shall be thy chosen valleys, they shall be ﬁlled with
chariots, and the horsemen shall bar thy gates : 
 8 And they shall lay open the gates of Judah; and they shall
look in that day unto the chosen houses of the city. 
 9 And they shall lay open the secret things of the houses of
the citadel of David. And they saw that they were more in
number, and that they had turned off the water of the old pool
into the city, 
 10 And that they had pulled down the houses of Jerusalem for
a fortification of the wall for the city. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 And ye made a lake between the two walls for the water of
the old pool: but ye looked not unto him that made it, neither
had respect unto him that formed it long ago. 
 12 And in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping,
and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth: 
 13 And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen slaughtering
sheep, eating ﬂesh and drinking wine: (Let us) eat and drink; for
tomorrow we shall die. 
 14 And the Lord of Hosts revealed himself in mine ears: Surely
this iniquity shall not be expiated for you till ye die, saith the Lord
God of Hosts. 
 15 Thus saith the Lord God of Hosts, Go, get thee unto this
steward, unto Shebna which is over the house; 
 16 What hast thou here, and whom hast thou here, that thou hast
hewed thee out a sepulchre here? Hewing him out his sepulchre
on high, graving a habitation in the rock for him ! 
 17 Behold, the Lord will hurl thee with the hurling of a mighty
man, and seize thee with a seizing. 
 18 He will roll thee, rolling up into a roll, like a ball into a far
country; there shalt thou die, and there the chariots of thy glory
shall be: thou shame of thy lord’s house. 
 19 And I will thrust thee from thy station, and from thine ofﬁce
shall he pull thee down. 
 20 And it shall be in that day, I will call my servant Eliakim,
the son of Hilkiah; 
 21 And I will clothe him with thy robe, and strengthen him
with thy girdle, and I will give thy authority into his hand; and
he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the
house of Judah. 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 And ye made for yourselves a (pool of) water between the
two walls, further inward than the old pool ; and ye looked not to
him who made it from the beginning, and ye saw not him that 
 12 And the Lord of Hosts called it in that day weeping, and
beating of the breast, and shaving of the head, and girding with 
 13 But they on their part made merriment and exultation, slaying
oxen and slaughtering sheep, so as to eat ﬂesh and drink wine,
saying, Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die. 
 14 And this is revealed in the ears of the Lord of Hosts, that
this sin shall not be forgiven you until ye die. 
 15 Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Go into the temple-chamber,
unto Shebna the <treasurer> and say to 
 16 What dost thou here, and what hast thou to do here, that
thou hast. hewn for thyself here a monument, and made for thyself
a monument on high, and graven an habitation for thyself in a rock? 
 17 Behold now, the Lord of Hosts will cast out and will
root out a man, and will take away thy robe, and thy crown
of glory, 18 And shall hurl thee into a land, great without measure,
and there shalt thou die; and shall turn thy ﬁne chariot to disgrace,
and the house of thy ruler to be trodden down, 
 19 And thou shalt be taken from thy stewardship, and from
thy state. 
 20 And. it shall be in that day, (that) I will call my servant
Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah; 
 21 And I will put on him thy robe, and thy crown will I
give him, and thy power; and thy stewardship will I give into
his halnds; and he shall be as a father to them that dwell in
Jerusalem. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 22 And I will lay the key of the house of David upon his
shoulder; and he shall open, and none shall shut, and he shall
shut, and none shall open: 
 23 I will ﬁx him as a peg in a sure place; and he shall be
for a throne of honour to his father's house. 
 24 And they shall hang upon him all the honour of his father's
house, the offspring and the offshoots, all small vessels, from the
vessels of bowls and even to the vessels of jars. 
 25 In that day, saith the LORD of Hosts, shall the peg that is
ﬁxed in a sure place be removed, and be cut down, and fall; and
:the burden that is upon it shall be cut off; for the Lord hath
spoken it. 
 XXIII. The burden of Tyre. 
 1 Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for it is laid waste, so that there
isno house, no entering in : from the land of Chittim it is revealed
to them. 
 2 Be silent, ye inhabitants of the isle: the merchants of Zidon,
that pass over the sea, replenished thee. 
 3 And on great waters the seed of Shihor, the harvest of the
Nile, was her revenue ; and it was the gain of nations. 
 4 Be thou ashamed, O Zidon ; for the sea, the stronghold of the
sea, speaketh: I have not travailed, nor brought forth, neither
have I nourished up young men, nor brought up virgins. 
 5 When the report cometh to Egypt, they shall be sorely pained
at the report of Tyre. 
 6 Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye inhabitants of the isle. 
 
 
 
 

 
 22 And I will give the glory of David unto him, and he shall
rule, and there shall be none that gainsayeth him ; [and I will lay
the key of the house of David upon his shoulder, and he shall
open, and there shall be none that shall shut; and he shall shut,
and there shall be none that openeth] 
 23 And I will set him as a ruler in a sure place, and he shall be
for a throne of glory of his father's 
 24 And upon him shall every one trust, that is honourable in
his father's house, from small to great, and they shall be
upon him 
 25 In that day. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts: The man that
is ﬁrmly ﬁxed in a sure place shall be shaken, and shall fall, and
the glory that is upon him shall be taken away, for the Lord hath
spoken it. 
 XXIII. The vision of Tyre. 
 1 Wail, ye ships of Carthage, for (she) is perished, and they no
longer come from the land of Chittim; she is led captive. 
 2 To whom are they become like, that dwell in the isle?
traffickers of Phoenicia, crossing the sea, 
 3 On great waters, a seed of traffickers; as when a harvest is
gathered in, (are) the traffickers of the nations. 
 4 Be thou ashamed, O Zidon, saith the sea; and the strength
of the sea saith, I travailed not, nor have I brought forth, non
nourished young men, nor raised up virgins. 
 5 But when it shall become known in Egypt, anguish shall take
hold of them concerning Tyre. 
 6 Depart unto Carthage: wail, ye that dwell in this isle. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 7 Is this your jubilant one? from the ancient days is her
antiquity; her feet bore her far away to sojourn. 
 8 Who hath ’this against Tyre, the crowning city?
whose merchants were princes, whose traffickers were the honourable
of the earth. 
 9 The Lord of Hosts hath purposed it, to profane the pride
of all glory, to bring into contempt all the honourable of the
earth. 
 10 Pass through thy land as the river, daughter of Tarshish 3
there is no girdle any more. 
 11 He hath stretched out his hand Over the sea, he hath disquieted
kingdoms 3 the Lord hath given commandment concerning
Canaan, to destroy the strongholds thereof. 
 12 And he said, Thou shalt no more be jubilant, thou outraged
virgin-daughter of Zidon 3 arise, pass over to Chittim; there also
thou shalt have no rest. 
 13 Behold the land of the Chaldaeans; 3 this people not:
Asshur founded it for desert creatures; they set up his (watch-)
towers, they roused up her palaces 3 he hath made her a ruin. 
 14 Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; 3 for your stronghold is
destroyed 
 15 And it shall be in that day, that Tyre shall beforgotten
seventy years, as the days of one king; from the end of seventy
years shall it be to Tyre as the song of the harlot. 
 16 Take a harp, go about the city, forgotten harlot; 3 do well in
playing, do much singing, that thou mayest be remembered. 
 
 
 

 
 7 Was not this your pride which was from the beginning, before
she was delivered up? 
 8 Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre? is she weaker, or
hath she no. strength? her merchants were honourable, rulers of
the earth 
 9 The Lord of Hosts hath counselled to undo the pride of the
honourable ones, and to disgrace all that is honourable upon the 
 10 Till thine own land : for indeed no longer come there ships
from Carthage. 
 11 But thine hand is no longer strong by sea, thou that didst
provoke kings: the Lord of Hosts hath commanded concerning
Canaan, to destroy her strength. 
 12 And they shall say, No longer shall ye any more insult and
injure the daughter of Zion ; and if thou depart to Chittim, neither
there shalt thou have rest ; 
 13 Or to the land of the Chaldaeans: that also is made desolate
by the Assyrians: [neither there shalt thou have rest, for] the wall
thereof is fallen. 
 14 Wail, ye ships of Carthage, for your stronghold is perished. 
 15 And it shall be in that day, Tyre shall be abandoned
seventy years, as is the time of a king, as the time of a man;
and it shall be after seventy <years> Tyre shall be as the
of a harlot. 
 16 Take a harp, rove about, thou harlot city that art forgotten;
play sweetly, sing much, that there may be remembrance of thee.
And it shall after seventy years, God shall make a visitation of
Tyre, and she shall turn again to her ancient way, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 17 And it shall be, from the end of seventy years, the Lord
shall visit Tyre, and she shall return to her hire, and shall play
the harlot with all the kingdoms of the earth on the face of the
ground. 
 18 And her gain and her hire shall be holy to the Lord:
it shall not be treasured nor stored up ; but her gain shall belong
to those that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and for
stately clothing. 
 XXIV. 1 Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty, and
maketh it void, and overturneth the face thereof, and scattereth
the inhabitants thereof. 
 2 And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with
the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her
mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender,
so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver
of usury to him. 
 3 The earth shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled; for
the Lord hath spoken this word. 
 4 The earth mourneth, fadeth ; the world languisheth, fadeth;
the highness of the people of the earth languisheth. 
 5 And the earth is become impious under her inhabitants; for
they have transgressed the laws, overstepped the statute, broken
the everlasting covenant. 
 6 Therefore hath a curse devoured the earth, and the inhabitants
of it are held guilty; therefore the inhabitants of the earth are
burned, and few men left. 
 7 The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth, all the
merryhearted do sigh. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 17 And shall be a port of merchandise for all the kingdoms of
the world. 
 18 And her merchandise, and her hire, shall be holy to the
’ Lord: it shall not ’ gathered together for them, but for those
that dwell before the Lord; all her merchandise, to eat, and to
drink, and to be ﬁlled, and for a contribution, as a memorial
< before the 
 XXIV. 1 Behold, the Lord destroyeth the world, and will
lay it desolate, and will uncover the face thereof, and scatter the
inhabitants thereof. 
 2 And the people shall be as the priest, and the servant
as the lord, and the maid as the lady; the buyer shall be as
the seller, the lender as the borrower, and the debtor as he to
whom he oweth. 
 3 The earth shall be utterly destroyed, and the earth shall be
utterly spoiled; for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken this. ’ 
 4 The earth mourneth, and the world is destroyed; and the
exalted ones of the earth do mourn. 
 5 And the earth transgresseth because of her inhabitants: be:
cause they have overstepped (the) law, and changed the ordinances
of the Lord, an everlasting covenant. 
 6 Therefore shall a curse devour the earth, because the inhabit-
ants of it have sinned ; therefore shall they that dwell in the earth
be poor, and few men shall be left. 
 7 The wine shall mourn, the vine shall mourn, all that are
joyful in heart shall groan. 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 The mirth of tabrets ceaseth, the uproar of the jubilant endeth,
the of the harp ceaseth. 
 9 They shall not drink wine with a song; strong drink shall be
bitter to them that drink it, 
 10 The city of wasteness is broken down; every house is shut
up, not to enter. 
 11 There is a crying in the streets for wine; all joy is grown
dark; the mirth of the land is gone. 
 12 There remaineth in the city desolation, and into ruin the
gate is beaten down. 
 13 For thus it shall be in the midst of the earth among the
peoples; as at the beating of an olive tree, as at the gleanings
when the vintage is done. 
 14 These shall lift up their voice, they shall sing; because of
the majesty of the Lord, they cry aloud from the sea. 
 15 Therefore glorify ye the Lord in the lights, the name of the
Lord God of Israel in the isles of the sea 
 16 From the comer of the earth have we heard songs, Honour
to the righteous. And I said, Wasting for me, wasting for me,
woe to me ! the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea,
the treacherous dealers have indeed dealt treacherously. 
 17 Fear, and a pit, and a snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of
the earth 
 18 And it shall be, he who ﬂeeth from the voice of the fear
shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh up out of the midst
of the pit shall be taken in the snare; for windows from on high
are opended, and the foundations of the earth do shake. 
 19 The earth is utterly broken, the earth is utterly shattered, the
earth is utterly uprooted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 Ceased is the joy of tabrets, ceased is the arrogance and
wealth of the wicked, ceased the voice of the harp. 
 9 They are ashamed, they drink not wine; the strong drink
becometh bitter to them that drink. 
 10 Every city is made desolate; it shall shut up the house,
that none come in. 
 11 Wail, for the wine, everywhere; ceased is all joy of the
land, 
 12 And cities shall be left desolate, and houses left therein
shall perish. 
 13 All this shall be in the land, in the midst of the nations;
like as if one gleaneth an olive tree, so shall they glean them;
and (as) if the vintage have ceased. 
 14 These shall cry aloud with their voice, but they that are left
upon the earth, shall rejoice together with the glory of the Lord,
the water of the sea shall be troubled 
 15 Therefore the glory of the Lord shall be in the isles of the
sea, the name of the Lord shall be glorious. 
 16 O Lord God ’Israel, from the corners of the earth have
we heard wonders, Hope (is) for the righteous. And they shall
say, Woe to them that set at nought; as for. them that set at
nought the law, 
 17 Fear, and a pit, and a snare, are upon you that dwell upon
the earth. 
 18 And it shall be, he that ﬂeeth from the fear shall fall into
the pit; and he that cometh out from the pit shall be caught by
the snare; for windows are opened out of heaven, and the foundations
of the earth shall be shaken. 
 19 The earth shall be clean confounded, and the dearth shall be
utterly helpless. 
 
 
 

 
 20 The earth staggereth like a drunkard, and swayeth to and fro
like a but; and the rebellion thereof is heavy upon it; and it shall
fall, and not rise again. 
 21 And it shall be in that day, the Lord shall visit (upon) the
host of the height in the height, and the kings of the earth upon
the earth. 
 22 And they shall be gathered, as prisoners are gathered, into a
pit, and after many days shall they be visited. 
 23 And the moon shall blush, and the sun be ashamed; for
the LORD of Hosts is King in mount Zion, and before his elders
(there is) glory. 
 XXV. 1 O Lord, thou art my God; I will exalt thee, I will
praise thy name; for thou hast done a wonder; counsels from of
old, truth, true. 
 2 For thou hast made of a city a heap; a fenced town to be
a ruin; a castle of strangers to be no city; it shall not be built,
for ever. 
 3 Therefore shall a strong people honour thee, the city of the
terrible nations shall fear thee. 
 4 For thou hast been a stronghold to the poor, a stronghold to
the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from
the heat; for the blast of the terrible (ones) is as a (rain)storm
upon a wall. 
 
 
 

 
 20 The earth tottereth and shall be shaken, like a but, like him
that is drunken and reeling; and shall fall, and shall not be able
to rise again, for her transgression is strong upon her. 
 21 And God shall bring his hand against the array of heaven,
and against the kings of the earth. 
 22 And they shall gather them together, and shut them into a
fastness, and into a prison ; after many generations shall there be
a visitation of them. 
 23 And the brick shall decay, and the wall shall fall; for the
Lord shall reign in Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before the elders ’
shall he be glorified 
 XXV; A Song. 
 1 O Lord my God, I will glorify thee, I will praise thy name;
for thou hast done wonderful things, a counsel ancient and true.
Amen, O Lord. ’ 
 2 For thou hast laid cities in a dust heap, strong cities, that
their foundations should fall; the city of the wicked shall not be
built, for ever. 
 3 Therefore shall the people that is poor praise thee, and cities
of men that suffer wrong shall bless thee. 
 4 For thou art become a helper to every humble city, and
a shelter to them that despair, for want ; from evil men shalt thou
rescue them—a shelter for the thirsty, and a breath of men
suffer wrong [shall bless thee], 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 Thou shalt subdue the uproar of strangers, like heat in a
parched land 3 (as) heat by the shadow of a cloud 3 the song of
the terrible shall be brought low. 
 6 And in this mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all
peoples a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat
things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined 
 7 And he will swallow up in this mountain the face of the
veil that veileth all peoples, and the covering that covereth all
nations. 
 8 He hath swallowed up death for ever; and the Lord GOD
will wipe away tears from off all faces 3 and the reproach of his
people shall he take away from 06 the earth 3 for the Lord hath
spoken it. 
 9 And one shall say in that day, Lo, this is our God 3 we waited
for him, and he will save us ; this is the LORD, we waited for him 3
we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation 
 10 For on this mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest, and
Moab shall be trampled in his place, as straw is trampled in the
water of the dung pit. 
 11 And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst thereof,
as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth (his hands) to swim 3 and
he shall lay low his haughtiness, together With the wiles of his
hands. ’ 
 12 And the fortress of the high place of thy walls hath he brought
down, laid low, brought to the ground, even to the dust. 
 XXVI. r In. that day shall this song be sung in the land
of Judah: We have a city of strength; salvation will he appoint
for walls and rampart. 
 
 
 

 
 5 As men faint hearted, thirsting in Zion,—from wicked
to whom thou gavest us over. 
 6 And the Lord of hosts shall do (it) for all the nations;
upon this mountain shall they drink gladness, they shall drink
wine 
 7 They shall anoint themselves with myrrh in this mountain.
Give over all this to the nations; for this counsel is against all the
nations. 
 8 Death was strong, and swallowed them up; and again God
hath taken away every tear from every face; he hath taken away
the shame of the people from all the earth, for the mouth of the
Lord hath spoken. 
 9 And they shall say in that day, Behold our God, in whom
we ever hoped; and we were triumphant, and will rejoice in our
salvation. 
 10 For God will give us rest upon this mountain, and the land
of Moab shall be trodden down, like as they tread a threshing
ﬂoor in wagons. 
 11 And he will let go his hands, like as he himself also humbled
him to destroy him; and he shall humble his pride, whereto he
laid his hands. 
 12 And the height of the refuge of thy wall shall be humble,
and it shall come down, even unto the ground. 
 XXVI. A Song. 
 1 In that day shall they sing this song over the land of Judah ;
saying, Behold, a strong city; and he shall set salvation for us
for the wall and the outer, wall. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 Open ye the gates, that a righteous nation which keepeth
truth may enter in., 
 3 A steadfast mind thou keepest in peace, peace; because he
is secure in thee. 
 4 Trust ye in the LORD for ever ; for in Jah the Lord is a
Rock of Ages. 
 5 For he hath brought doWn the dwellers in the height, the
lofty city 3 he bringeth. it low, bringeth it low even to the earth ;
he bringeth it even to the dust. 
 6 The foot shall trample on it, the feet Of the afflicted, the
steps of the poor. 
 7 The way for the righteous is straightness; thou levellest
straight the path of the righteous. 
 8 Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O LORD, have we waited
for thee 3 the desire of our soul is for thy Name and thy
memorial. 
 9 With my soul have I desired thee in the night: yea, with
my spirit within me will I seek thee early ; for when thy judgments
are upon the earth, the inhabitants of the world learn
righteousness. 
 10 Let favour be shewed to the wicked, he learneth not
righteousness ; in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly,
and will not look upon the majesty of the Lord 
 11 Lord, thy hand is lifted up, they will not see ; they shall
see, and be ashamed at the jealousy for a people ; yea, ﬁre shall
devour thine enemies. 
 12 Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us ; for all our works
also hast thou wrought for us. 
 13 O Lord our God, otherllords beside thee have had dominion
over us 3 through thee only will we make mention of thy name. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 Open ye the gates, let a people enter which keepeth righteousness
and keepeth truth, 
 3 Laying hold of and keeping peace. For in
thee 
 4 They have hoped, for ever, O Lord, the great, the ever
lasting God, 
 5. Who didst humble and bring down them that dwelt in high
places; strong cities shalt thou throw down, and bring down
to the ground, 
 6 And the feet of the gentle and humble shall tread upon
them. 
 7 The way of the godly is become straight; and the way of
the godly (is) prepared. 
 8 For the way of the Lord is judgment; we have hoped in
thy name, and in the remembrance, 
 9 Which our soul longeth for. [A Song] Out of the night
doth my spirit rise early toward thee, O God, because thy
commandments are a light upon the earth. Learn righteousness,
ye that dwell on the earth, 
 10 For ceased is the ungodly; he will not learn righteousness
upon the. earth, he will not perform truth; let the wicked be
removed, that he may not see the glory of the Lord. 
 11 Lord, thy arm is uplifted, and they knew it not; but when
they learn it, they shall be ashamed; jealousy shall take hold of
a people that is untaught, and now shall ﬁre devour the
enemies. 
 12 Lord, our God, grant peace to us, for all things dost thou
give us. 
 13 Lord, our God, take us for thine own; O Lord, beside.
thee we know none other, thy name do we name. 
 
 
 
 

 
 14 Dead, they shall not live; shades, they shall not rise;
therefore hast thou visited ahd destroyed them, and made all
their memory to perish. 
 15 Thou hast increased, the nation, O Lord, thou hast increased
the nation; thou hast gotten thee glory; thou hast
enlarged all the borders of the land. 
 16 Lord, in trouble have they inquired for thee; they uttered
a whisper]; thy correction was upon them. 
 17 Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time
of her delivery, doth writhe, crieth out in her pangs; so were
we at thy presence, O Loan. 
 18 We were with child, we writhed, we brought forth as it
were wind; we wrought not salvation (for) the earth, neither have
inhabitants of the earth fallen. 
 19 Thy dead ones shall live, my dead body shall arise: Awake
and sing, ye that dwell in the dust; for thy dew is the dew of
lights, and the earth shall cast forth shades. 
 20 Go, my people, enter into thy chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee; hide thyself for a little moment, until the
indignation be passed by. 
 21 For behold, the Lord cometh out of his place, to visit the
iniquity of the inhabitant of the earth upon him; and the earth
shall disclose her bloodshed, and shall no more cover her slain. 
 XXVII. 1 In that day the lord with his hard and great
and strong sword will visit (upon) leviathan the ﬂeeing serpent,
and leviathan the coiled serpent; and he shall slay the dragon
that is in the sea. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 14 But the dead shall not see life, neither shall physicians
raise them up; for this cause didst thou bring them in, and
destroyedst them, and removedst all that was male among them. 
 15 Add unto them evils, O Lord, add evils to all the glorious
ones of the earth. 
 16 Lord, in affliction I remembered thee, in slight affliction
(was) thy correction upon us. 
 17 And as she who travaileth draweth near to bring forth, and
crieth out in her travail, so were we before thy beloved. 
 18 For the fear of thee, O Lord, did we conceive, and
travailed, and brought forth; we made a breath of thy salvation
upon the earth, but they that dwell upon the earth shall fall. 
 19 For the dead shall arise, and they that are in the tombs
shall be roused up, and they that are in the earth shall rejoice;
for the dew that cometh from thee is healing to them, but the
land of the ungodly shall fall. 
 20 Go, my people, enter into thy chambers, shut thy door,
hide thyself ever so little a while, until the wrath of the Lord be
passed by. 
 21 For behold, the Lord from his holy (place) bringeth his
anger upon them that dwell upon-the earth; and the earth shall
reveal her <blood>, and the earth shall not cover up the 
 XXVII. 1 In that day shall God bring his sword, the holy,
and great, and strong, against the dragon, the serpent that ﬂeeth,
against the dragon, the crooked serpent, and shall slay the
dragon. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 In that day, a vineyard of foaming wine ; sing ye to it ; 
 3 I the LORD am its keeper 3 every moment I water it; lest
any hurt it, I keep it night and day. 
 4 Wrath have I none; who will set briers and thorns against
me in battle? I would march against it, I would burn it all
tothether 
 5 Or else let him lay hold of my stronghold, make peace with
me: let him make peace with me. 
 6 As to what cometh, Jacob shall take root, Israel shall
blossom and bud, and they shall ﬁll the face of the earth with
fruit. 
 7 Hath he smitten him according to thesmiting of those that
smote him 3 or is he slain according to the slaying of his slain? 
 8 In exact measure, by sending her away, thou contendest
with her; he driveth her away with his rough wind in the day
of the east wind. 
 9 Therefore by this shall the guilt of Jacob be expiated; and
this is all the fruit, taking away his sin ; when he maketh all the
stones of the altar like chalkstones dashed in pieces, the Asherim
and sun-pillars arise no more. 
 10 For the defenced city is solitary, an habitation deserted
and forsaken like the wilderness ; there shall the calf feed, and
there shall he lie down, and consume her branches. ’ 
 11 In the ’withering of her boughs they shall be broken off 3
women cOme, and set them on ﬁre ; for it is not a people of
discernment: therefore he that made them hath no compassion
on them, and he that formed them sheweth them no favour. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 In that day (shall there be) a fair vineyard; (there is) a
desire to begin (a song) upon her. 
 3 I am a strong city, a city besieged; in vain shall I water
it; for it shall be taken by night, but by day shall the wall fall. 
 4 There is none but she laid hold upon her; who shall set
me to guard a reed in a ﬁeld? because of this enemy's
have I set her at nought. Therefore for this cause bath the Lord
God done all things that he appointed. I am burnt up, 
 5 They that dwell in her shall cry: Let us make peace with
him, let us make peace. 
 6 They that come, the children of Jacob shall bud, and Israel
shall blossom, and the world shall be ﬁlled with the fruit. 
 7 Shall it be that, as he himself smote, he also shall be
stricken; and as himself slew, so he shall be slain? 
 8 Fighting and reproaching, he shall send them forth: wast
thou not he that devised, with thy harsh spirit, to slay them with
a spirit of wrath? 
 9 Therefore shall the transgression of Jacob be taken away,
and this is his blessing, when I have taken away his sin, when
I have laid all the stones of the altars in fragments, as light
dust; and their trees shall not remain, and their idols, destroyed
as a forest (reaching) far. 
 10 The fold that is inhabited shall be left deserted, like an
abandoned fold; and it shall be a feeding place for long time,
and there shall they rest. 
 11 And after a time there shall not be in her any green thing,
because of its drying up. Ye women that come from a spectacle,
come hither; for it is not a people that hath understanding;
therefore he that made them shall not pity, nor shall he that
formed them have mercy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 12 And it shall be in that day, the Lord shall beat out (corn)
from the stream of the River, unto the brook of Egypt, and ye
shall be gathered one by one, Ο ye children of Israel. 
 13 And it shall be in that day, a great trumpet shall be blown;
and they shall come which were lost in the land of Assyria, and
the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall worship the Lord in
the holy mount at Jerusalem. 
 XXVIII. I Ah, the proud crown of the drunkards of
Ephraim, and the fading ﬂower of his glorious beauty, which is
on the head of the fat valley of them that are smitten down with
wine! 
 2 Behold, the Lord hath a strong and mighty One, like a storm
of hail, a tempest of destruction; like a storm of mighty overflowing
waters, he casteth it down to the ground with force. 
 3 The proud crown of the drunkards of Ephraim shall be
trodden with feet; 
 4 And the fading flower of his glorious beauty, which is on
the head of the fat valley, shall be as an early ﬁg before the
summer, which when any seeth, he swalloweth it while it is yet
in his hand. 
 5 In that day shall the Lord of Hosts be for a crown of beauty
and a diadem of glory unto the remnant of his people, 
 6 And for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth ’over the
judgment, and for might to them that turn back war at the
gate. 
 7 And these also have erred with wine, and are gone astray
with strong drink; priest and prophet have erred with strong
drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they are gone astray with
strong drink; they have erred. in vision, have wavered in decision. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 12 And it shall be in that day, the Lord shall fence them in
from the channel of the river unto Rhinocolura ; and ye, gather
together one by one the children of Israel. 
 13 And it shall be in that day, they shall blow with the great
trumpet, and they shall come, <that perished> in the land of the
Assyrians. and they that perished in Egypt, and shall (come to)
worship the Lord at the holy mountain in Jerusalem. 
 XXVIII. 1 Ah, for the crown of pride; (it is) the hirelings
of Ephraim, the flower that falleth from the glory upon the crest
of ’the fat mountain, they that are drunken without wine. 
 2 Behold, a mighty and a hard thing is the wrath of the Lord,
like a hailstorm rushing dbwn without shelter, rushing down with
force; like a great body of water sweeping a land, it shall cause
rest to the land: with hands 
 3 And with feet shall the crown of pride be trampled down,
the hirelings of Ephraim. 
 4 And the ﬂower, that falleth from the hope of glory, shall be
upon the top of the high mountain; like an early fruit of the
ﬁg, he that seeth it, before he take it into his hand, shall desire
to swallow it up. 
 5 In that day shall the Lord of Hosts be the crown of hope
that is woven of the glory for him that is left of my— 
 6 And they shall be left,—for a spirit of judgment, for
and for might, forbidding to destroy. 
 7 For these are gone astray by reason of wine; they went
astray because of the strong drink, priest and prophet left the
way because of wine, they were disturbed from their revelling
in strong drink, they went astray. This is a vision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 For all tables are full of ﬁlthy vomit; there is no place
(left). 
 9 Whom will he teach knowledge? and whom will he make to
discern the message? those that are weaned from the milk,
removed from the breasts? 
 10 For it is precept upon precept, precept upon precept; line
upon line, line line upon line; here a little, there a little. 
 11 For with stamrnerings of lip and another tongue will he
speak to this people. 
 12 He who said to them, This is the. rest, give ye rest to the
weary ; and this is the refreshing; and they would not hear. 
 13 And the word of the Lord shall be unto them precept upon
precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line ; here
a little, there a little; that they may go, and stumble backward,
and be broken, and snared, and taken. 
 14 Therefore hear the word of the lord, ye men of scorn,
rulers of this people which is in Jerusalem. 
 15 Because ye have said: We have made a covenant with
death, and have made an agreement with hell; the overflowing
scourge, when it passeth through, shall not come unto us: for
we have made lies our refuge, and in falsehood have we hid
ourselves: 
 16 Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I am he that
hath founded in Zion a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner-,
stone of sure foundation; he that believeth shall not be in
haste. 
 17 And I will set judgment for a line, and righteousness for
a, plummet ; and hail sweepeth the refuge of lies, and waters
shall overflow the hiding place. 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 A curse shall devour this counsel; for this counsel is for
greedicness´ 
 9 To whom did we declare evils, and to whom did we declare
a message? it is they who are weaned from milk, they who are
withdrawn from the breast. 
 10 Expect thou affliction upon affliction, hope upon hope, yet
a little, yet a little, 
 11 Because of contempt of the lips, through another tongue;
for they shall speak, to this people, 
 12 Saying unto it, This (is) the rest for the hungry, and this
(is) the datruction ; and they would not hear. 
 13 And the oracle of the Lord God shall be unto them
affliction upon affliction, hope upon hope, yet a little, yet a little,
that they may go, and fall backward; and they shall venture, and
be destroyed, and be taken. 
 14 Therefore hear the word of the Lord, ye afflicted men, and
rulers of this people, that is in Jerusalem. 
 15 Because ye say, We have made a covenant with hell, and
agreements with death; if a rushing tempest pass by, it shall
not come upon us ; we have set falsehood for our hope, and by
falsehood will we be sheltered: 
 16 Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will Set in the
foundations of Zion a stone, very precious, chosen out, a chief
corner stone, honourable ; in her foundations (I set it), and he
who believeth thereon shall not be ashamed. ’ 
 17 And I will set judgment for a hope, and my mercy shall
be for balances; and ye who vainly trust in a lie—for the
shall not pass you by, 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 18 And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and
your agreement with hell shall not stand; the overﬂowing scourge,
when it passeth through, ye shall be for it to tread down. 
 19 As oft as it passeth through, it shall take you away; for
morning by morning shall it pass through, by day and by night;
and it shall be sheer vexation to discern the message. 
 20 For the bed is too short for stretching oneself out, and the
covering too narrow when wrapping oneself. 
 21 For the Lord shall rise up as (in) mount Perazim, he
shall be disquieted as (in) the valley of Gibeon, to do his deed—
strange is his deed: and to work his work—alien is his work. 
 22 And now deal ye not scoffingly, lest your bonds grow
strong; for a destruction and a decision have I heard from the
Lord God of Hosts, upon the whole earth. 
 23 Give ye ear, and hear my voice; attend, and hear my
speech. 
 24 Is the ploughman always ploughing, to sow? (always)
opening and harrowing his ground? 
 25 Doth he not, when he hath made plain the face thereof,
cast abroad fennel, and scatter cummin, and set the wheat in
rows, and barley in the appointed place, and spelt in the border
thereof? 
 26 And he instructeth him according to judgment; his God
teacheth him. 
 27 For fennel is not threshed with a sledge, nor is a cart
wheel rolled upon cummin; for fennel is beaten out with a staff,
and cummin with a rod. 
 28 Bread (corn) is crushed ; for not for ever is he threshing it,
and driving his cart wheel and his horses; he doth not crush it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 18 Lest also it take away your covenant of death, and your
hope regarding hell shall not abide: if a rushing tempest come
upon you, ye shall be trodden down by it. 
 19 When it passeth by, it shall take hold upon you; very
early shall it pass by by day, and by night it shall be an evil
hope. Learn to hearken, 
 20 Being straitened; we cannot ﬁght, and of ourselves we are
weak, to be assembled together. 
 21 As (at) the mount of ungodly men shall he stand up, and
it shall be, in the valley of Gibeon, with wrath shall he do his
works, a work of bitterness; but his wrath shall deal strangely,
and its bitterness shall be strange. 
 22 And ye, may ye not rejoice, and let not your bonds be
strong; for I have heard from the Lord of Hosts of doings,
fulfilled and cut short, which he will perform upon all the land. 
 23 Give ear, and hearken to my voice; attend, and hear my
words. ’ 
 24 Will the ploughman plough all the day P or will he prepare
the sowing before he have tilled the land? 
 25 And, when he hath levelled the face of it, ﬁrst he soweth
small fennel and cummin, and again wheat, and barley, and spelt
in thy borders. 
 26 And thou shalt be instructed by the judgment of thy God,
and shalt rejoice. 
 27 For the fennel is not winnowedlwith harshness, nor will
he drive a cart wheel round upon the cummin ; but the fennel is
shaken with a rod, and the cummin 
 28 Shall be eaten with bread. For not for ever will I be
angered with you, neither shall the voice of my bitterness trample
you down. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 29 This also cometh forth from the Lord of Hosts; he
maketh counsel wonderful, he maketh wisdom great. 
 XXIX. 1 Ah, Ariel, Ariel, city (where) David camped! add
ye year to year; let the feasts go round. 
 2 And I will distress Ariel, and there shall be lamentation and
lament; and she shall be unto me as Ariel. 
 3 And I will encamp against thee round about, and will lay
’ siege against thee with a mound, and raise siege works against
thee : 
 4 And thou shalt be brought down, out of the earth shalt thou
speak, and thy speech shall come low from the dust; and thy
voice shall be as that of a ghost from the ground, and thy speech
shall chirp out of the dust. 
 5 And the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust,
and the multitude of the terrible ones like passing chaff; and it
shall be in a moment suddenly. 
 6 From the LORD of Hosts shall she be visited with thunder,
and earthquake, and great noise; whirlwind, and tempest, and
ﬂame of devouring ﬁre. 
 7 And as a dream, a vision of the night, shall the multitude
of all the nations be, that are arrayed against Ariel, even all that
are arrayed against her and her fortress, and distress her. 
 8 And it shall be as when a hungry man dreameth, and
behold, he eateth ; and he awaketh, and his SOul is empty; and
as a thirsty man dreameth, and behold, he drinketh; and he
awaketh, and behold, he is faint, and his soul craveth; so shall
all the multitude of the nations be, that are arrayed against
mount Zion. 
 
 1. ‘ ’ i.e. prob. ‘lion of ’ or ‘(altar) hearth of ’ 
 2. ‘there shall be moaning and ’ (Cheyne). Heb. words are from
same root. 
 3. ‘round ’: lit. ‘like a ’: differs from ‘like ’ only by
 ABBREV and ABBREV (and points). 
 5. ‘multitude’: word sometimes rendered ‘uproar.’ 

 
 29 And these wonders are come forth from the Lord of Hosts:
take counsel, lift up a vain appeal. 
 XXIX. 1 Ah, city of Ariel, against which David made
war; collect fruits year after year: for ye shall eat with Moab. 
 2 For I will afﬂict Ariel, and her strength and her wealth shall
be mine. 
 3 And I will make a circle like David against thee, and will
set up a palisade around thee, and will plant towers against thee, 
 4 And thy wOrds shall be brought low unto the earth, and thy
words shall sink into the earth; and thy voice shall be as they
that speak from the earth, and close to the ground shall thy
voice be weak. 
 5 And like a dust cloud from a wheel shall the wealth of the
ungodly be, and like chaff borne along; and it shall be like a
moment, suddenly, 
 6 From the Lord of Hosts; for there shall be a viSitation
with crying aloud and earthquake; and with a great voice, a rush-
ing tempest and a ﬂame of ﬁre devouring. 
 7 And as he that dreameth a dream shall be the wealth of
all the nations that did march against Israel, and all they that
marched against Jerusalem, and all that were gathered together
against her and afﬂicted her. 
 8 And they shall be like them that in sleep drink and eat, and
when they arise, their dream is vain ; and like as he that is thirsty
dreameth, as he that drinketh, and when he ariseth, he still
thirsteth, and his soul hath hoped after an empty thing; so shall
the wealth be of all the nations, as many as did march against
Jerusalem, and against the mount Zion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 9 Astonish yourselves, and be astonished; blind yourselves,
and be blind: they are drunken, and not with wine; they reel,
and not with strong drink. 
 10 For the LORD hath poured out upon you a spirit of deep
sleep, and bath closed your eyes, the prophets; and your heads,
the seers, hath he covered. 
 11 And the vision of it all is become unto you as the words
of the sealed writing, which they give ’ to one that knoweth
writing, saying, Read this, pray: and he saith, I cannot, for it
is sealed. 
 12 And the writing is given unto one that knoweth not writing,
saying, Read this, pray; and he saith, I know not writing. 
 13 And the Lord said, F orasmuch as this people draweth
near, honoureth me with its mouth and with its lips; and hath
removed its heart away from me; and their fear of me is a precept
of men, that is taught: 
 14 Therefore, behold, I am he that will again deal wonderquy
with this people, wonderfully and a wonder; and the wisdom of
its wise men shall perish, andthe discernment of its discerning
men shall hide itself. 
 15 Ah, they that go deep from the Lord to hide counsel
and their-works are in darkness, and they say, Who seeth us?
and Who knoweth us? 
 16 The perverseness of you! shall the potter be reckoned as
clay? that the thing made should say of him that made it, He
made me not! and the thing formed of him that formed it,
’ discerneth not! 
 17 Is it not yet but a very little while, and Lebanon shall
turn to garden-land, and the garden-land be reckoned as a
forest? 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 9 Faint ye, and fall away, and stagger drunkenly, not with
strong drink, nor with wine. 
 10 For the Lord hath given you to drink with a spirit of
slumber, and will close their eyes, and their ’ and their
’ eyes; they it is that see the hidden things. 
 11 And all these words shall be as the sayings of this book
that is sealed, and if they give it to a man that knoweth letters,
saying, Read these; then he shall say, I cannot read, for it is sealed. 
 12 And this book shall be given into the hands of a man such
as knoweth not letters, and one shall say to him, Read this; and
he shall say, I know not letters. 
 13 And the Lord said, This people draweth near me, with
their lips they honour me, but their heart is far from me; but in
vain do they worship me, teaching the commandments of men,
and doctrines. 
 14 Therefore behold, I will proceed further to change this
people; and I will change them, and will destroy the wisdom of
the wise, and the prudence of the prudent will I hide. 
 15 Ah, they that take counsel deeply, and not through the
Lord; ah, they that take counsel in secret, and their works shall
be in darkness, and they shall say, Who hath seen us? and who
shall ﬁnd us out, or what we do? 
 16 Shall ye not be reckoned as the ’s clay? Shall the
thing formed say to him that formed (it), Thou didst not form
’ or the thing made to him that made it, Thou didst not
make me with understanding? 
 17 Is it not yet a little while, and Lebanon shall be changed
(to be) as mount Carmel, and mount Carmel shall be reckoned
’ for a forest? 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 18 And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of a writing,
and the eyes of the blind shall see out of gloom and out of
darkness. 
 19 And the meek shall add to their. joy in the LORD, and the
poor among men shall exult in the Holy One of Israel. 
 20 For the terrible one is at an end, and all is overylwith the
scoffer, and that watched for iniquity are cut off . 
 21 That make a man offend by a word, and lay a snare for
him that convinceth in the gate; and turn aside the righteous
with emptiness. 
 22 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the house of
Jacob, he that redeemed Abraham 3 Not now shall Jacob be
ashamed, neither shall his face now be pale. 
 23 For when he seeth his children, the work of my hands, in
the midst of him, they shall count my name holy, and countholy
the Holy One of Jacob, and fear the God of Israel. 
 24 And they that err in spirit shall learn discernment, and they
that murmur shall receive instruction. 
 XXX. 1 Ah, the rebellious sons, saith the LORD, that take
counsel, and not of me ; and weave a web, and not with my spirit,
that they may add sin to sin 
 2 That walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my
mouth; to strengthen themselves in the stronghold of Pharaoh,
and to trust in the shadow of Egypt. 
 3 Therefore shall the stronghold of. Pharaoh be to yOu a shame, I
and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 18 And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of a book,
and they that are in the darkness, and that are in the mist, the
eyes of the blind shall see. 
 19 And the poor shall exult because of the Lord, and they
that were despaired for among men shall be ﬁlled with joy. 
 20 The transgressor hath failed, and the overweening man is
perished, and they that transgressed for evil doing are utterly
destroyed, 
 21 And they that cause men to err in a word; and all them
that convince in the gates shall they set as a stuniblingblock, and
. they turned aside the just among the unjust. 
 22 Therefore thus saith the Lord upon the house of Jacob,
which he separated from (among) Abraham, Jacob shall not now
. be ashamed, nor Israel now change his face: 
 23 But when they see their children, my works, they shall
sanctify my name because of me, and sanctify the Holy One of
Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. 
 24 And, they that wander in spirit shall learn prudence, but
they that murmur shall learn to hearken, and the stammering
tongue shall learn to speak peace. 
 XXX. 1 Ah, rebel children, thus saith the Lord: ye took
counsel, and not through me, and made agreements, not through
my spirit, to add sins upon sins: 
 2 They that walk to go down into Egypt, but they asked not
me; that they might be helped by Pharaoh, and sheltered by the
Egyptians. 
 3 For Pharaoh shall be your shelter to your shame, and to
· them that trust in Egypt a reproach. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 4 For his princes are at Zoan, and his messengers have reached
Hanes. 
 5 All shall be. ashamed of a people · shall not profit
them, not for a help nor profit, but for a shame, and also a
reproach. 
 6 The burden of the beasts of the south country.
Through a land of distress and anguish, whence are the lioness
and lion, viper and ﬂying ﬁery serpent, they carry their riches
on the shoulder of young asses, and their treasures upon the
bunches of camels, to a people that shall not profit 
 7 And Egypt, vain and empty will be their help: therefore
I cry concerning this, Rahab are they, a sitting still. 
 8 Now go, write it on a tablet before them, and inscribe it in
a book, and let it be for an after day, for ever and ever: 
 9 For it is a rebellious people, lying sons, sons that will not
hear the law of the LORD: 
 10 Which say to the seers, Ye shall not see, and to them that
have vision, Have visions not of right things, speak unto us
smooth things, see delusive visions. 
 11 Remove you out of the way, turn aside out of the path;
make to cease from before us the Holy One of Israel. 
 12 Therefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel: Because ye
reject this word, and trust in oppression and crookedness, and
stay thereon; 
 13 Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as afalling breach,
swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometb suddenly,
in a moment. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 4 For there are in Tanis Chieftains, evil messengers: 
 5 In vain shall they weary themselves with a people that shall
not profit them, neither for help nor for profit, but for shame
and reproach. 
 6 The vision of the fourfooted beasts that are in the wilderness.
Amid the affliction and the straitening, a lion, and a lion's
whelp: thence also serpents, and the offspring of ﬂying serpents;
men who brought their wealth upon asses and camels to a
nation which shall not profit them [for help, but for shame and
reproach]. 
 7 The Egyptians will profit you in vain and emptily; declare
to them, This your consolation is vain. 
 8 Now therefore sit and write this upon a tablet, and in
a book, that these things shallbe for days of times and even
for ever. 
 9 For it is a disobedient people, lying sons, who were not
willing to hear the law of God, 
 10 They which say unto the prophets, Declare not unto us,
and to them that see visions, Talk not unto.us...but talk to us
and declare unto us another beguiling, 
 11 And turn us away from this way; take away from us this
path, and take away from us the oracle of Israel. 
 12 Therefore thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel,
Because ye were disobedient to these words, and hoped in
a lie, and because thou didst murmur, and trusted in this
wor 
 13 Therefore this sin ’shall be to you like a suddenly falling
wall of a city that hath been taken, whereof the ruin cometh
suddenly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 14 And he shall break it as a ’s jar is broken, shivering
it unsparingly; and there shall not be found a sherd among the
shivered fragments thereof, to take fire. from the hearth, or to draw
water from a cistern. 
 15 For thus saith the Lord GOD, the Holy One of Israel: In
returning and rest shall ye be saved: in quietness and in confidence
shall be your strength; and ye were unwilling. 
 16 And ye said, No: for we will flee upon horses; therefore
shall ye flee; and. We will ride upon the swift; therefore shall
they that pursue you be swift. 
 17 one thousand from before the rebuke of one, before the
rebuke of ﬁve shall ye ﬂee, till ye be left as a mast upon the top
of a mountain, and like the ensign on the hill. 
 18 And therefore will the LORD wait, that he may be gracious
unto you; and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have
mercy upon you ; for the LORD is a God of judgment; happy are
all that wait for him. 
 19 For a people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem; thdu shalt
weep no mOre; he will surely be gracious unto thee at the voice
of thy cry ; as he heareth it, he answereth thee. 
 20 And the Lord shall give you the bread of affliction, and
water of oppression; and thy teachers shall not withdraw any
more, and thine eyes shall see thy teachers: 
 
 
 

 
 14 And the ruin of it shall be as the breaking of an earthen
vessel, a small piece of a jar, so that one cannot ﬁnd among
them a sherd wherein thou canst take up ﬁre, or wherein thou
canst <take away> canst a little water. 
 15 Thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, When thou
shalt turn and lament, then shalt thou be saved, and learn where
thou wast (placed): when thou hadst thy trust in vanities, your
strength became vain: and ye would not hear. 
 16, But ’. said, We will ﬂee upon horses; therefore shall ye
ﬂee: and ye said, We will be mounted on swift (ones); therefore
shall they that pursue you be swift. 
 17 And a thousand shall ﬂee because of the voice of one: and
because of the voice of ﬁve shall many ﬂee; until ye be left as
a mast upon a mountain, and as (one) bearing a standard upon
a hill. 
 18 And again will God wait, that he may pity you, and for this
cause will he be exalted, that he may have mercy on you, because
the Lord your God is a judge; and where will ye leave your
glory? Blessed are all they that wait upon him. 
 19 For a holy people shall dwell in Zion; and Jerusalem
wept sore, Have mercy on me: and he will have mercy on the
voice of thy cry ; when he saw, he hearkened unto thee. 
 20 And the Lord shall give to you bread of affliction, and
’ ’ scant water; and no longer shall they that beguile thee draw near
to thee; for thine eyes shall see them that beguile thee, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 21 And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This
is the way, walk ye in it: when ye turn to the right hand, and
when ye turn to the left. 
 22 And ye shall defile the covering of thy graven images of
silver, and the overlaying of thy molten images of gold; thou
shalt scatter them as an unclean thing; thou shalt say unto it,
Begone! 
 23 And he shall give. the rain of thy seed, with which thou
shalt sow the ground; and bread, the increase of the ground, and
- it shall be rich and fat: in that day shall thy cattle feed in a
broad pasture. 
 24 And the oxen and. the young asses that till the ground shall
eat salted provender, winnowed with the shovel and with the fan. 
 25 And there shall be, upon every high mountain, and on
every uplifted hill, channels and streams of waters in the day of
the great slaughter when the towers fall. 
 26 And the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun,
and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven
days, in the day that the LORD bindeth up the hurt of his people,
and healeth the stroke of its wound. 
 27 Behold, the Name of the LORD cometh from far; burning
his anger, and denseness of rising smoke; his lips are full of
indignation, and his tongue like devouring ﬁre. 
 28 And his breath is as an overflowing stream, dividing even
to the neck, to shake the nations in the shaking sieve of vanity;
and a bridle that leadeth astray shall be in the jaws of peoples. 
 29 Your song shall be like the night When a feast is kept holy;
and joy of heart, like his that marcheth with the ﬂute, to go into
the mountain of the LORD, to the Rock of Israel. 
 
 

 
 21 And thine ears shall hear the words of the beguilers behind
thee; it is they who say, This is the way, let us walk in it, whether
to the right hand or to the left. 
 22 And thou shalt remove the idols, overlaid with silver and
with gold; thou shalt make them small, and shalt scatter them
away as the water of her that sitteth apart, and as dung shalt thou
remove them. 
 23 Then shall the rain be upon the seed of thy land, and the
bread of the increase of thy land shall be plenteousness, and shall
be fat; and thy cattle shall feed in that day in a rich place and a
large. 
 24 Your bulls, and your oxen that plough the land, shall eat
bran prepared for them winnowed with barley. 
 25 And there shall be, upon every high mountain, and upon
every lofty hill, ﬂowing water in that day, when many perish, and
when towers fall. 
 26 And the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun,
and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, in the day when the
Lord healeth the breaking of his ’peOple, and shall heal the pain
of thy wound. 
 27 Behold, the name of the Lord cometh after long time,
burning is his wrath; with glory is the oracle of his lips, his
oracle is full of wrath, and the wrath of his anger shall devour like
fire 
 28 And his breath, like water sweeping in a torrent-bed, shall
come even to the neck, and shall be divided, to confuse nations,
in vain error; and vain error shall pursue them, and shall lay
hold on them, face to face. 
 29 Ought ye to rejoice continually, and to enter continually
into my holy places as though feasting, and to. enter in as though
in joy, with the pipe, into the house of the Lord, to the God of
Israel? 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 30 And the Lord shall cause the majesty of his voice to be
heard, and the lighting down of his arm to be seen, with fury of
anger, and ﬂame of devouring ﬁre; scattering, rainstorm, and
hailstone. . ’ 
 31 For at the voice of the Lord shall Asshur be affrighted ;
with the rod shall he smite. 
 32 every passing of the staff of destiny, which the Lord
shall make to light on him, shall be with tabrets and harps; and
with waving wars shall he ﬁght against her. ’ 
 33 For a burning place is made ready from yesterday; even it
is prepared for the king; he hath made it deep, and hath made
it broad; its pile ﬁre and much wood; the breath of the Lord,
like a stream of brimstone, bumeth against it. 
 XXXI. 1 Ah, they that go down to Egypt for help; and.
they stay on horses, and trust in chariots, for they are many, and in
horsemen, for they are very strong; and they look not unto the
Holy One of Israel, neither. inquire of the Lord! 
 2 And he also is wise; and bringeth evil, and removeth not his
words; and he riseth up against the house of evil doers, and
against the help of them that work naughtiness. 
 3 And the Egyptians are men, and not God: and their horses
ﬂesh, and not spirit: and the Lord shall stretch out his hand, and
he that helpeth shall stumble, and he that is holpen shall fall, and
they all shall come to an end together. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 30 And God shall make the glory of his voice heard, even to
show the wrath of his arm with wrath and anger and devouring
ﬂame, he shall thunder violently (upon them), and like water and
hail descending with violence. 
 31 For through the voice of the Lord shall the Assyrians be
vanquished, with the wound wherewithsoever he smiteth them.. 
 32 And it shall be unto him round about, whence was his hope
of help, wherein he himself trusted; they, with tabrets and harp,
shall turn and make war upon him. 
 33 For thou shalt not be deceived Before the days: was it also
prepared for thee to reign? a deep trench, layers of wood, ﬁre
and much wood? the wrath of the Lord is as a trench burning
with brimstone. 
 XXXI. 1 Ah, they that go down into Egypt for help; that
trust in horses and in chariots, for they are many, and in horses,
they are a great multitude; and trusted not in the Holy One of
’Israel, and sought not God. 
 2 And,. wise himself, he brought evils upon them; and his word
shall not be set at nought; and he shall rise up against the houses
of wicked men, and against their vain hope, 
 3 An Egyptian, a man, and not a god: the ﬂesh of. horses, and
’ there is no help (in them); but the Lord shall set his hand against
them, and they that (come to) help shall weary themselves, and all
shall perish together. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 4 For thus said the LORD unto me, As the lion growleth, and
the young lion over his prey, against whom a multitude of
’ shepherds is called forth: at their voice he is not affrighted, and
at their uproar he is not dismayed; so shall the LORD of Hosts
come down to ﬁght against mount Zion, and against the hill
thereof. 
 5 As birds hovering, so will the LORD of Hosts protect Jeru-
salem; protecting and rescuing, passing over, and setting free. 
 6 Return ye unto him from whom they have deeply revolted,
Ο children of Israel. 
 7 For in that day they shall reject every man his false gods of
silver, and his false gods of gold, which your own hands have
made you, a sin. 
 8 And Asshur shall fall, by the sword of no man, and the
sword, of none born of men, shall devour him; and he shall ﬂee
from before the sword, and his young men shall be for tribute. 
 9 And his rock shall pass away, from fear, and his princes be
frighted from the standard, saith the LORD, who hath his ﬁre in.
Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem. ’ 
 XXXII. 1 Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and
(as) for princes, they shall rule in judgment. 
 2 And a man shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and a
covert from the rainstorm; as channels of water in a dry place,
as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land. 
 3 And the eyes of them that see shall not be closed, and the
ears of them that hear shall hearken. 
 
 
 
 

 
 4 For thus saith the Lord to me, Like as if the lion or the
whelp crieth out over the prey, which he hath taken, and roareth
over it until the mountains be filled with his voice; and they were
vanquished, and cowered before the greatness of his wrath; so
shall the Lord of Hosts come down to ﬁght against the mount
Zion, and against her mountains. 
 ’ 5 As birds ﬂying, so will the Lord hold a shield to defend
Jerusalem, and will deliver it, and preserve it, and will save it. 
 6 Turn you, ye that counsel the deep counsel, and the
disobedient; 
 7 For in that day shall men disown the works of their hands,
those of silver, and those of gold, which their hands have made. 
 8 And Asshur shall fall; not the sword of a man, nor the
sword of mankind, shall him; and he shall ﬂee, not from
before a pursuer; but the young men shall be vaniluished. 
 9 For they shall be encompassed by a rock, as with a palisade,
and shall be vanquished, and he that ﬂeeth shall be taken.
Thus saith the Lord, Happy is he who hath a seed in Zion, and
kinsmen in Jerusalem. 
 XXXII. 1 For behold, a just king shall reign, and rulers
shall rule with judgment. 
 2 And the man shall be, hiding these sayings, and he shall be
hidden as from rushing water; and he shall appear in Zion as a
rushing river, glorious in a thirsting land. 
 3 And no longer shall they put their trust in men, but they
shall lend ’ears to hear. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 4 And the heart of the hasty shall have discernment to know,
and the tongue of the stammerers shall be quick to speak
clearly. · 
 5 The fool shall no more be called noble, nor the mean spoken
of as liberal. 
 6 For the fool will speak folly, and his heart will work naughtiness,
todo impiety, and to speak error against the Lord, to empty
the soul of the hungry, and he will cause the drink of the thirsty
to fail. 
 7 And the means of the mean are evil; it is he that deviseth
plots to destroy the meek with words of falsehood, even when the
needy speaketh judgment. 
 8 But the noble deviseth noble things; and he shall stand
ﬁrm on noble things. 
 9 Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice: ye
conﬁdent daughters, give ear unto my speech. 
 10 In a year, and days over, shall ye be disquieted, ye conﬁdent
Ones ; for the vintage is at an end, the gathering shall not come. 
 11 Tremble, ye women that are at ease: be disquieted, ye
conﬁdent ones; strip you, and make you bare, and gird (sackcloth)
upon your loins. 
 12 They shall smite upon the breasts, for the pleasant ﬁelds,
for the fruitful vine. 
 13 Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and
briers ; yea, upon all houses of joy the exultant city. 
 14 For the palace is forsaken: the uproar of the city deserted;
hill and watchtower serve for caves for ever, a joy of wild asses,
a pasture of ﬂocks: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 4 And the heart of the weak ones shall attend to hear, and the
’mering tongues shall soon learn to speak peace. 
 5 And no longer shall they bid the fool to rule, and no longer
shall thy servants say, Hold thy peace. 
 6 For the fool will speak folly, and his heart will imagine vain
things, to fulfil transgressions, and to utter error against the Lord,
to scatter hungry souls abroad, and to make empty the souls that
thirst. 
 7 For the counsel of the wicked doth counsel transgressions,
to destroy the humble with unjust words, and to scatter the
reasonings of the humble in judgment. 
 8 But the godly counselled prudent things, and this counsel
shall abide. 
 9 Ye wealthy women, stand up, and hear my voice; ye
daughters in hope, hearken to my words. 
 10 For the days of a year call to remembrance in pain, with
hope; the vintage is consumed, the sowing is ceased, and shall no
longer come. 
 11 Be astonished, be grieved, ye confindent women; strip
yourselves, ’bare, gird sackcloth upon your loins. 
 12 And smite yourselves upon the breasts, for a ﬁeld of desire,
and the fruit of the vine. 
 13 The land of my people, the thorn and grass shall come
up, and joy shall be removed from every dwelling. A wealthy
city, 
 14 Desolate houses: they shall abandon the wealthiof a city,
and desirable houses; and the villages shall be caverns for ever,
a joy of wild asses, feeding places of shepherds, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 15 Until a spirit be poured out upon us from on high, and the
wilderness become a garden-land, and the garden-land be counted
for a forest. 
 16 And judgment shall rest in the wilderness, and righteousness.
dwell in the garden-land. - 
 17 And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the
effect of righteousness quietness and conﬁdence for ever. 
 18 And my people shall abide in a home of peace, and in
secure dwellings, and in quiet resting-places. 
 19 And it shall hail at the downfall of the forest; and the city
shall lie low in lowliness. 
 20 Happy are ye, that sow beside all waters; that send forth
the foot of the ox and the ass. 
 XXXIII. 1 Ah, thou that spoilest, and thyself art not
spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they have not dealt
treacherously with thee! When thou shalt cease to spoil, thou
shalt be spoiled; when thou shalt have succeeded in dealing
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee. 
 2 O Lord, be gracious unto us; we have waited fOr thee; be
thou their arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of
trouble. 
 3 At the voice of the uproar the’peoples ﬂee; at the lifting up
of thyself the nations are scattered. 
 4 And your spoil shall be gathered as the caterpillar gathereth;
as locusts run to and fro, shall they run upon it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 15 Until there come upon you a spirit from on high. And
Carmel shall be. desolate, and Carmel shall be reckoned as a
forest. 
 16 And judgment shall rest in the wilderness, and righteousness
shall dwell in Carmel. 
 17 And the works of righteousness shall be peace, and right-
eousness shall obtain rest, and they shall be confident ones for
ever. 
 18 And his people-shall dwell in a city of peace, and shall
dwell in confidence, and they shall rest amid wealth. 
 19 And the hail, if it descend, shall not come upon you. And
they that dwell in the forests shall be confident, as they in the
plain. 
 20 Blessed are they that sow upon every water, where ox and
ass treadeth. 
 XXXIII. 1 Ah, for them that ill-treat you, but you none
ill-treateth; and he that setteth at nought setteth not you at
nought; they that set at nought shall be taken and shall be
delivered up; and like a moth upon a garment, so shall they be i
crushed. 
 2 O Lord, have mercy us, for in thee do we trust; the
’seed of the disobedient hath fallen into destruction, but our
salvation is in a time of affliction. 
 3 Because of the voice of the fear of thee, peoples shrank
away, from the fear of thee, and the nations were scattered. 
 4 But now shall your spoils, from small and great, be gathered
together; like as if one gathereth locusts, so shall they make sport
upon you. ’ 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 The LORD is exalted, for he dwelleth in the height; he hath
ﬁlled Zion with judgment and righteousness. 
 6 And there shall be faithfulness in thy times; power of
salvation, wisdom and knowledge: the fear of the Lord, that
is his treasure. ’ 
 7 Behold, their valiant ones cry without; the mesSengers of
peace weep bitterly. 
 8 The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man is ceased; he
hath broken the covenant, despised cities, not man. 
 9 The earth mourneth, languisheth; Lebanon is ashamed,
withereth; Sharon becometh like a desert; and Bashan and
Carmel shake off (their leaves). 
 10 Now will I rise, saith the LORD; now will I exalt myself;
now will I lift up myself. 
 11 Ye shall conceive hay, ye shall bring forth stubble; your
breath is ﬁre which shall devour you. 
 12 And peoples shall become burnings of lime; thorns cut up,
they shall burn in the ﬁre. 
 13 Hear, ye that are far, what I have done; and ye that are
near, acknowledge my might. 
 14 The sinners are afraid in Zion; trembling hath seized the
impious. Who among us can sojourn with deVOuring ﬁre? who
among us can sojourn with everlasting burnings? 
 15 He that walketh in righteousness, and speaketh upright-
ness; that rejecteth the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his
hands from taking hold on a bribe, that stoppeth his ear from
hearing of bloodshed, and closeth his eyes from seeing evil: 
 
 
 

 
 5 Holy is God that dwelleth on high; Zion is ﬁlled with judg-
ment, and with righteousness. 
 6 By a law shall they be delivered up; in treasures is your
salvation; therein is wisdom and knowledge, and reverence
towards the Lord; these are the treasures of righteousness. 
 7 Behold now, in your fear shall they be afraid; they whom
ye feared shall be afraid because of you; for messengers shall be
sent, claiming peace, weeping bitterly, entreating for peace. 
 8 For their paths shall be made desolate; for the fear of the
nations is ceased, and their covenant with these is removed, and
’ye shall not reckon them as men. 
 9 The earth mourneth, Lebanon is ashamed, Sharon becometh
marshes; Galilee shall be made manifest, and Carmel. 
 10 Now will I rise up, saith the Lord, now will I be glorified
now will I be uplifted. 
 11 Now shall ye see, now shall ye be ashamed; vain shall be
the strength of your spirit, ﬁre shall devour you. 
 12 And the nations shall be burnt up, as a thorn cast upon a
ﬁeld and burnt up. 
 13 They that are from afar off shall hear what I have done;
they that draw near shall learn my strength. 
 14 The transgressors in Zion have stood aloof: trembling shall
take hold of the ungodly. Who shall declare unto you that a ﬁre
is burning? who shall declare unto you the place that is for ever? 
 15 One that walketh in righteousness, speaking in a straight
way, hating transgression and wrong doing, and shaking off his
hands from gifts; that maketh his ears dull, that he may not hear
a judgment of blood; that closeth his eyes, that he may not see
wrongdoing, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 16 He shall inhabit heights, fortresses of rocks (are) his high
place; his bread is given him, his water is sure. 
 17 Thine eyes shall see a king in his beauty; they shall
behold a land of distances. 
 18 Thine heart shall meditate on terror. Where is he that
counted? Where he that weighed? where he that counted the
towers? 
 19 Thou shalt not see the stubborn people, a people too deep
of language to be heard; of a stammering tongue, there is no
discerning. 
 20 Look upon. Zion, the city of our appointed assembly;
thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a habitation of security, a tent
that shall not be removed; its stakes shall not be plucked up
for ever, and all its cords are unbroken. 
 21 But there in majesty the Lord will be for us a place of
rivers, of canals wide stretching; thereon shall go no galley with
oars, neither shall gallant ship pass thereby. 
 22 For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the
Lord is our king: he will save us. 
 23 Thy cords are loosed, they cannot ﬁrmly ﬁx their pole;
they have not spread out the banner; then was divided the prey
of plunder in abundance; lame men do spoil spoil. 
 24 And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick; the people
that dwelleth therein is forgiven (its) iniquity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 16 He shall dwell in a. lofty cavern of a strong rock; bread
shall be given unto him, and his water (is) sure. 
 17 Ye shall see a king with glory, and your eyes shall behold
a land from afar off. 
 18 Your soul shall meditate on the fear of the Lord; where
are the scribes? where are the counsellors? where is he that
counted them that were nourished up together, 
 19 A small and a great people? with whom they took not
counsel, neither understood he their deep speech: 
 20 Behold Zion our city, our salvation; thine eyes shall see
Jerusalem, it is a wealthy city, tents which shall not be shaken,
’ nor shall the stakes of the tent thereof be disturbed for ever, nor
its cords broken: 
 21 For the name of the Lord is great. Ye shall have a place,
rivers and canals, wide and spacious; thou shalt not go by this
way, neither shall a ship go driving along. 
 22 For my God is great; he will not pass me by; the Lord is
our judge, the Lord is our ruler, the Lord is our king; the Lord,
he shall save us. 
 23 Thy cords are broken, for they were not strong; thy mast
hath bent, it will not loosen the sails, it will not lift Up a signal,
until it be given up for plunder; therefore shall many lame take
plunder. 
 24 And the people that dwelleth among them shall not say,
I am faint; for their sin is forgiven. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 XXXIV. 1 Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken,
ye peoples; let the earth hear, and the fulness thereof; the world,
and all that come forth of it. 
 2 For the LORD hath indignation against all nations, and fury
against all their host; he hath laid them under the ban, he hath
given them to slaughter. 
 3 And their smitten shall be cast out, and their carcases, their
stink shall go up, and mountains shall be melted with their
blood. 
 4 And all the host of heaven shall waste away, and the heavens
shall be rolled up as a scroll, and all their host shall fade, as a
leaf fadeth from a vine, and as a fading (leaf) from a ﬁg tree. 
 5 For my sword hath drenched itself in heaven; behold, it
shall come down upon Edom, and upon the people of my ban,
for judgment. 
 6 The LORD hath a sword, it is ﬁlled with blood, it is made
rich with fat, with the blood of lambs and he goats, with the fat of
the kidneys of rams; for the ’LORD bath a sacrifice in Bozrah,
and a great slaughter ’the land of Edom. 
 7 And ’ oxen shall come down with them, and bullocks
with bulls; and their land shall be drenched with blood, and
their dust made rich with fat. 
 8 For the Lord hatha day of vengeance, and a year of recompense
for the quarrel of Zion. 
 9 And her streams shall be turned into pitch, and her dust
into brimstone; and the land thereof shall become pitch that
burneth. 
 10 Night and day it shall not be quenched; for ever its smoke
shall go up; from generation to generation it shall lie waste; for
ever and ever there shall be none passing through it. 
 
 
 
 

 
 XXXIV. 1 Draw near, ye nations, and hearken, ye rulers;
let the earth hear, and they that dwell therein, the world, and the
people that is in it. 
 2 For the wrath, of the Lord is against all the nations, and
anger against the muster of them; to destroy them, and to give
them over to slaughter. 
 3 And their wounded shall be cast forth, and their dead, and
their stink shall go up, and the mountains shall be wet with their
blood. 
 4 And the heaven shall be rolled up like a book, and all the
stars shall fall like leaves from a vine, and as leaves fall from a
ﬁg tree. 
 5 My sword is drunken in the heaven; behold, it shall
descend upon Idumaea, and upon the people of perdition with
judgment. 
 6 The sword of the Lord is ﬁlled with blood, it is enriched
with fatness, and with the fat of goats and rams. For there is a
sacrifice to the Lord in the land of Bozrah, and a great slaughter
in Idumaea. 
 7 And the chief ones shall fall with them, and the rams and
the bulls; and the earth shall be drunken with the blood, and
shall be ﬁlled with the fat of them. 
 8 For it is the day of the judgment of the Lord, and the year
of the recompense of the judgment of Zion. 
 9 And the torrents thereof shall be turned into pitch, and
her land into brimstone; and her land shall be burning like
pitch, 
 10 By night and day; and shall not be quenched for ever; and
the smoke thereof shall ascend upward, it shall be desolated for
generations. 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 But the pelican and the bittern shall possess it; and the
horned owl and the raven shall dwell in it; and he shall stretch
out upon it the line of wasteness and the plummet of void. 
 12 As for the nobles thereof, none shall be there to proclaim
the kingdom ; and all her princes shall be no more. 
 13 And her castles shall spring up (with) thorns; nettles and
brambles in the fortresses thereof; and it shall be a habitation
for jackals, a court for [daughters of ] ostriches. 
 14 And desert creatures shall meet the wolves, and the shaggy
beast shall call to his fellow; the screech owl surely shall repose
there, and ﬁnd for herself a resting-place. 
 15 There shall the arrowsnake make her nest, and lay, and
hatch, and gather in her shadow; there surely shall the kites be ,
brought together, each with her mate. 
 16 Inquire ye out of the book of the Lord, and read; none
of these is missing, none shall want her mate; for my mouth,
it hath commanded, and his spirit, it hath brought them
together. 
 17 And he hath cast the lot for them, and his hand hath
divided it unto them by line; they shall possess it for ever, to
generation and generation shall they dwell therein. 
 XXXV. 1 The wilderness and the dry place shall rejoice;
and the desert shall exult, and blossom like the narcissus. 
 2 It shall. blossom abundantly and exult, yea with exultation.
and singing; there shall be given to it the glory of Lebanon, the
honour of Carmel and Sharon: they shall see the glory of the
Lord, the honour of our God. 
 
 
 

 
 11 And birds, and hedgehogs, and ibises, and ravens shall
dwell therein; and there shall be cast over it the measuring line
of desolation, ’satyrs shall dwell therein. 
 12 Her rulers shall not be; for her kings and her rulers and
her great ones shall come to destruction. 
 13 And the thorn shall grow up upon her cities and upon her
strongholds: and it shall be lurking places for owls and a court of
ostriches. 
 14 And demons shall meet with satyrs, and shall call one
to another; there shall satyrs rest, for they have found them a
resting-place. 
 15 There doth the hedgehog nest, and the earth keepeth her
young in safety; there do the hinds meet, and see one ’s
faces:. 
 16 By number come they, and not one of them perisheth;
none seeketh another; for the Lord hath commanded them, and
his spirit hath brought them together. 
 17 And he himself shall cast lots for them, and his hand
divideth (for them) to feed; inherit it for ever; forgenerations of.
’ generations shall they rest thereon. 
 XXXV. 1 Be thou glad, O thirsting desert; let the wilder-
ness rejoice, and blossom as a lily; 
 2 And the desolate places of Jordan shall blossom and rejoice:
and the glory of Lebanon is given unto it, and the honour of
Carmel; and my people shall see the glory of the Lord, and the
exaltation of God. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 Strengthen ye the slack hands, and confirm the stumbling,
knees. 
 4 Say to the hasty of heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your
God, vengeance cometh, retribution of God; himself cometh, and
will save you. 
 5 Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of
the deaf shall be unstopped: 
 6 Then shall the lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue of
the dumb sing; for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and
streams in the desert. 
 7 And the burning sand shall become a pool, and the thirsty
land springs of water; in the habitation of jackals, their lair, a
court for reed and rush. 
 8 And a highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be
called the holy way; there shall not pass over it (any) unclean;
and his for them; and whosoever walketh in the way, and fools,
shall not go astray. 
 9 No lion shall be there, nor shall the (most) violent of beasts
go up thereon; it shall not be found there; and redeemed ones
shall walk (there), 
 10 And the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to
Zion with song, and everlasting joy upon their head 3 they shall
attain gladness and joy, and sorrow and sighing shall ﬂee away. 
 XXXVI. 1 And it came to pass, in the fourteenth year of
the king Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against
all the fortified cities of Judah, and took them. 
 2 And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to
Jerusalem to the king Hezekiah with a great army. And he took
his stand by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the
fuller's ﬁeld. 
 
 
 

 
 3 Be strong, ye slackened hands, and feeble knees: 
 4 Give comfort, ye faint hearted; be strong, fear not; behold,
our God will give a recompense of judgment, yea, will give; he
himself will come and save us. 
 5 Then shall the eyes of the blind men be Opened, and the
ears of deaf men shall bear. 
 6 Then shall a lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue of
stammerers shall be clear, for there hath broken out water in the
wilderness, and a torrent in a thirsting land. 
 7 And the waterless land shall become pools, and into the;
thirsting land shall come a fount of water; there shall be joy of
birds, beds of reed and pools. 
 8 A pure way shall be there, and it shall be called a holy way,
and (no unclean person shall pass by there, neither shall an
unclean way be there; but the dispersed shall walk upon it, and
they shall not err. 
 9 And no lion shall be there, nor shall any of the evil beasts
gloetrignthereon, nor be found there; but ransomed shall walk
therein, 
 10 And (those) gathered together because of the Lord; they
shall return, and come to Zion with joy, and everlasting joy upon
their head; for on their head (shall be) praise and triumph, and
joy shall take hold upon them; fled away is pain, and grief, and
sighing. 
 XXXVI. 1 And it came to pass, in the fourteenth year of
the reign of Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of the Assyrians came
up against the cities of Judah, that were strong, and took them. 
 2 And the king of the Assyrians sent Rabshakeh from Lachish
to Jerusalem, to king Hezekiah, with a great power; and he stood
in the watercourse of the upper pool, in the way of the fuller's
ﬁeld. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 And there went out to him Eliakim, Hilkiah's son, which
was over the house, and Shebna the secretary, and Joah, Asaph's
son, the recorder; 
 4 And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say, I pray, to Hezekiah,
Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria, What trust is this
wherewith thou trustest? 
 5 I say, It is only a word of -the lips, counsel and strength for
war: now, in whom trustest thou, that thou rebellest against me? 
 6 Lo, thou trustest on this bruised reed, on Egypt; whereon if
a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh
’of Egypt to all that trust in him. 
 7 And if thou say to me, We trust in the LORD our God: is it
not he, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath
removed, and said to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship
before this altar? 
 8 And now, exchange pledges, I pray, with my lord the king of
Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able
to set for thyself riders upon them. 
 9 How then wilt thou turn away the face of one governor
among the least of my ’s servants, and puttest thy trust in
- Egypt for chariots and for horsemen? 
 10 And now is it without the LORD that I am come up against
this land to destroy it? the LORD said unto me, Go up against
this land, and destroy it. 
 11 And Eliakim said, and Shebna, and Joah, unto Rabshakeh,
Speak, pray, unto thy servants in the Aramaean tongue, for we
understand it: and speak not unto us in the Jewish tongue, in-the
ears of the people which are on the wall. 
 12 And Rabshakeh said, Is it to thy lord, and to thee, that my
lord hath sent me, to speak these words? Is it not to the men
that sit on the wall, to eat their own dung, and drink their own
water with you? 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 And Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, the steward, went out to
him, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the
recorder. 
 4 And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye to Hezekiah, Thus
saith the great king, the king of the Assyrians: why trustest thou? 
 5 Cometh there battle array in counsel, or in words of the
lips? and now in whom dost thou trust, that thou resistest me? 
 6 Behold, thy trust is on this staff of reed, that is broken, upon
- Egypt: whosoever leaneth upon it, it will go into his hand; so is
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and all they that trust in him. 
 7 But if ye say, We trust in the Lord our God: 
 8 Now join ye with my lord, the king of the Assyrians, and
I will give you two thousand horses, if ye shall be able to furnish
men (to ride) upon them. 
 9 How, pray, can ye turn back the face of one governor?
they are slaves ’ trust in the Egyptians, for horse and for
horseman. 
 10 And now, are we come up without the Lord against this
land, to war against it? 
 11 And Eliakim said unto him, and Shebna the scribe, and
Joah, Speak unto thy servants in the Syrian tongue, for we understand
(it); and speak not to us in the Jewish tongue; and why
speakest thou in the ears of the men that sit upon the wall? 
 12. And Rabshakeh said to them, Hath my lord sent me to
your lord, or to you, to speak these words; is it not to the men
that sit on the wall, that they may eat dung and drink (their own)
water with you together? 
 
 
 
 

 
 13 And Rabshakeh Stood, and cried with a great voice in the
Jewish tongue, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the ἦ
king of AsSyria 
 14 Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you; for he
shall not be able to deliver you. ὁ . 
 15 And let not Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, saying,
The LORD will safely deliver us; this city shall not be given into
the hand of the king of Assyria. ’ 
 16 Hearken not to Hezekiah; for thus saith the king of
Assyria., Make agreement with me, and come ’out to me; and eat
ye everyone of his vine, and everyone of his ﬁg tree, and drink
ye everyone the waters of his cistern : 
 17 Until I come and take you away to a land like your own -
land, a land of corn and new wine, a land, of bread and vine-
yards: 
 18 Lest Hezekiah entice you, saying, The LORD will deliver
us. Have the gods of the nations delivered everyone his land
out of the hand of the king of Assyria? 
 19 Where are the gods-of Hamath and Arpad? where the ’
gods of Sepharvaim? and verily they have delivered Samaria out
’ of my hand! . 
 20 Who are they among all the gods of these lands, that have
’ delivered their land out of my hand? that the LORD should
deliver Jerusalem out of my hand! 
 21 But they ’held their peace, arid answered him not a word;
for the king’s commandment was thus, saying, Ye shall not answer ’
him. ’ 
 22 And Eliakim came, the son of Hilkiah, that’was over the
house, and Shebna the secretary, and J-oah, the son of Asaph,
the recorder, unto Hezekiah, with clothes rent, and told him the ’
words of Rabshakeh. 
 
 
 

 
 13 And Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a great voice in the
Jewish tongue, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the
king of the Assyrians; 
 14 Thus saith the king: Let not Hezekiah deceive you with
words, which shall not be able to deliver you. 
 15 And let not Hezekiah say to you, God will deliver us, and.
this city shall not be given up into the hand of the king of the
Assyrians. 
 16 Hearken not to Hezekiah. Thus saith the king of the
Assyrians, If ye will be blessed, come out to me, and ye shall
eat everyone of his vine and his ﬁgs, and drink the water of your
cistern; 
 17 Until I come and take you to a land, as (is) your own land,
a land of corn and wine, and loaves, and vineyards. 
 18 Let not Hezekiah deceive you, saying, Your God will deliver
us. Have the gods of the nations delivered each one his own
land out of the hand of the king of the Assyrians? 
 19 Where is the god of Hamath and Arpad? and where is the
god of the city of Sepharvaim? were they able to deliver Samaria
out of my hand? 
 20 Which of the gods of all these nations delivered his land
out of my hand? that God shall deliver Jerusalem out of my
hand; 
 21 And they were silent, and none answered him a word,
because the king had commanded that none should answer. 
 22 And Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, the steward, went in, and
Shebna the scribe of the power, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the
recorder, unto Hezekiah, with their clothes rent, and reported
unto him the words of Rabshakeh. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 XXXVII. 1 And it came to pass, when the king Hezekiah
heard it, that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth.
and went into the house of the Lord 
 2 And he sent Eliakim, who was over the house, and Shebna
the secretary, and the elders of the people, covered with sackcloth,
unto Isaiah the prophet, the son. of Amoz. 
 ’ 3 And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day is a
day of trouble, and chastisement, and contempt; for the children
are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth. 
 4 It may be the LORD thy God will hear the words of Rab-
shakeh, whom the king of Assyria his lord hath sent to reproach
the living God, and will chastise the words which the Lord thy
God hath heard; and thou wilt lift up prayer for the remnant that
is found. 
 5 And the servants of the king Hezekiah came to Isaiah. 
 6 And- Isaiah said unto them, Thus- shall ye say unto your
lord, Be not afraid of the words which thou hast heard, wherewith
the young men of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.
ᾇ Behold, I will put a spirit in him, and he shall bear a message,
and return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the
sword in his own land. 
 8 And Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria
waning against Libnah, for he had heard that he had broken up
from Lachish. 
 9 Ahd he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Cush, He
is gone forth to war against thee. And he heard, and sent
messengers to Hezekiah, saying, 
 
 

 
 XXXVII. 1 And it came to pass, when the king Hezekiah
heard (it), he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth about him, and
went up into the house of the Lord. 
 2 And he sent Eliakim, the steward, and Shebna, the scribe,
and the elders of the priests, with sackcloth about them, unto
Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz. 
 3 And they said to him, Thus saith Hezekiah, Today is a day
ἢ of affliction, and reproach, and reproof, and anger; for the pang
is come upon her that travaileth, and she hath not strength to
bring forth. 
 4 The Lord God hear the words of Rabshakeh, with which
the king of the Assyrians sent him to reproach the living God,
and to reproach with the words which the. Lord thy God hath
heard; [and thou shalt pray to thy Lord] concerning these that
are left. 
 5 And the servants of the king came to Isaiah 
 6 And Isaiah said to them, Thus shall ye say to your lord,
Thus saith the Lord, Fear not thou for the words which thou
hast heard, wherewith the envoys of the king of the Assyrians
have reproached me. 
 7 Behold, I will put a spirit in him, and he shall hear tidings,
and return to his land, and he shall fall by the sword in his
land. 
 8 And Rabshakeh returned, and came upon the king besieging
Libnah: and the king of the Assyrians heard 
 9 ThatTirhakah, king of the Ethiopians, had gone out to
besiege him; and when he heard it, he turned away, and sent
messengers to Hezekiah, saying, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 10 Thus shall ye say to Hezekiah, king of Judah, saying, Let
not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive ’ saying,
Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of
Assyria. 
 11 Behold, thyself hast heard what the kings of Assyria have I
done to all the lands, putting them under the ban; and shalt thou
be delivered; 
 12 Did the gods of the nations, which my fathers destroyed,
deliver them? as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children
of Eden which were in Telassar? 
 13 Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and
the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena and IvvahP 
 14 And Hezekiah took the letter from the hand of the messengers,
and read it; and Hezekiah went up unto the house of
the LORD, and spread it before the Lord 
 15 And Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord saying, 
 16 O Lord of Hosts, God of Israel, that sittest upon the
cherubim, thou art the God, thou alone, for all the kingdoms of
the earth; thou hast made the heavens and the earth. 
 17 Incline thine ear, Lord, and hear; open thine eyes, O
LORD, and see; and hear all the words of Sennacherib, which he
hath sent to reproach the living God. 
 18 Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all
the lands, and their land, 
 19 And have given their gods into the ﬁre; for they were no
gods, but the work of ’s hands, wood and stone; and have
destroyed them. ’ 
 20 And now, LORD our God, save us from his hand: and all
the kingdoms of the earth shall know that thou art the LORD,
thou alone. 
 

 
 10 Thus shall ye say to Hezekiah, king of Judah, Let not thy
God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem
shall be given over into the hand of the king of the Assyrians. 
 11 Hast thou not heard what the kings of the Assyrians have
-done to all the earth, how they have destroyed it? 
 12 Did the gods of the nations, they whom my fathers de-
stroyed, deliver them? Gozan, and Haran, and [Rezeph], which
are in the land of [Telassar]? 
 13 Where are the kings of Hamath, and of Arpad? and of
the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivah? 
 14 And Hezekiah took the book from the messengers, and
opened it before the Lord. 
 15 And Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord, saying, 
 16 O Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, that sittest upon the
cherubim, thou alone art the God of every kingdom of the world;
thou hast made heaven and earth. 
 17 Hearken, Ο Lord; look upon us, Lord, and see the
Ezrdds of Sennacherib, which he hath sent to reproach the living
God. 
 18 For in truth, the kings of the Assyrians have laid waste the
whole world, and their country, 
 19 And cast their idols into the ﬁre; for they were no gods,
but the works of men's hands, wood and stone; and destroyed
them. 
 20 But do thou, O Lord our God, save us outof their hand,
gag. every kingdom of the earth may know that thou alone art
God. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 21 And Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah, saying,
Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, As to what thou hast
prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria: 
 22 This is the word which the LORD hath spoken concerning
him: The virgin daughter of Zion hath despised thee, hath
mocked thee; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head after thee. 
 23 Whom hast thou reproached and reviled? and against
whom hast thou raised high thy voice? thou hast lifted up thine
eyes on high against the Holy One of Israel. 
 24 By the hand of thy servants thou hast reproached the
Lord, and hast said, With the multitude of my chariots I have
ascended the height of the mountains, the recesses of Lebanon;
and I will cut down the ’loftiness of his cedars, the choice of his
ﬁr-trees; and I will come into the height of his border, the forest
of his garden-land. 
 25 I have digged, and drunk waters; and with the sole of my
feet I will dry up all the canals of Mazor. ’ 
 26 Hast thou not heard? from long ago I made it, from
ancient days I formed it; now have I brought it to pass, and
thou hast been (destined) to lay waste, as ruinous heaps, fortified
cities. 
 27 And their inhabitants were short of hand, they were dis-
mayed and ashamed: they were (as) grass of the ﬁeld, and green
’algke, grass of the hoUse tops, and a cornfield before it stands
in stalk 
 28 And thy down-sitting, and thy going out and thy coming
in I know, andthy rage, against me. 
 29 Because thy rage against me and. thy recklessness is come
up into mine ears, I will put my ring in thy nose, and my bridle
in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou
camest. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 21 And Isaiah the son of Amoz was sent to Hezekiah, and
said to him, Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, I have heard
the prayers which thou madest to me concerning Sennacherib
king of the Assyrians. ’ 
 22 This is the word which Godhath spoken concerning him;
The virgin daughter of Zion despiseth thee and mocketh thee;
the daughter of Jerusalem shaketh her head at thee. 
 23 Whom hast thou reproached and provoked? or against
’ hast thou lift up thy voice? what, hast thou not lifted up
thine eyes on high against the Holy One of Israel? 
 24 For by messengers thou hast reproached the Lord 3 for thou
saidst, By the multitude of my chariots have I gone up to the
height of the mountains, and to the utmost. parts of Lebanon,
and have Cut down the height of his cedar, and the beauty of his
cypress, and have entered into the height of the portion of his
forest, 
 25 And have made a mound, and have dried up waters, and
every gathering of water. 
 26 Hast thou not heard long since of these things that I have
done? from ancient days have I ordained it, and now have I
shown it forth, to make nations in strong places desolate, and
them that dwell in strong cities. 
 27 I slackened their hands, and they were withered up, and
became as green grass upon house-tops, and as wild couch-grass. 
 28 But now I know thy resting place, and thy going out,
thy coming in. 
 29 But thy rage with which thou ragedst, and thy bitterness,
have come up toward me, and I will put a muzzle on thy nose,
and ’a bit in thy lips, and will turn thee back by the way by which
thou camest. 
 
 
 

 
 30 And this shall be the sign unto thee: ye shall eat this year
that which groweth of itself, and the second year that which
springeth of the same: and in the third year sow ye, and reap,
and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof. 
 31 And the escaped of the house of Judah that are left, shall
again take root downward, and bear fruit upward. 
 32 For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they
that escape out of mount Zion; the jealousy of the LORD of
Hosts shall do this. 
 33 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the king of
Assyria, He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow
there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast up a bank
against it. By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and
shall not come into this city, saith the Lord. 
 35 And I will protect this city, to save it, for mine own sake,
and for my servant ’s sake. 
 36 And the. angel ’the Lord went out, and smote in the
camp of Assyria an hundred and fourscore and five thousand:
and (men) arose earl in the morning, and behold, they were all
dead corpses. 
 37 And Sennacherib king of Assyria broke up, and went, and
returned, and dwelt at Nineveh. 
 38 And it came ’pass, as he was worshipping in the house of -
Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote
’ him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Ararat;
and Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead. 
 XXXVIII. 1 In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death.
And Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, came unto him, and
said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Give orders to thine house;
for thou diest, and shalt not live. 
 
 
 

 
 30 And this is the sign to thee; eat, for this year, what thou
hast sown, and in the second year that which is left; and in the
third year sow and reap ye, and plant vineyards, and ye shall eat
the fruit thereof. 
 31 And there shall be they that are left in Judah, they shall
strike root downward, and bear seed upward. 
 32 For they that are left shall go forth from Jerusalem, and
they that are saved from mount Zion; the jealousy of the Lord of
Hosts will do this. 
 33 Therefore thus saith the Lord against the king of the
Assyrians, He shall not come into this city, nor cast a spear
against it, nor bring up a shield against it, nor compass it with a
trench, 
 34 But by the way that he came, by it shall he return. Thus
saith the Lord, 
 35 I will hold a shield before this city, to save it, for mine own
sake, and for David my ’s sake. 
 36 And there went forth an angel of the Lord, and destroyed
out of the camp of the Assyrians an hundred and fourscore
(and) ﬁve thousand; and (men) arising early found all the dead
bodies. 
 37 And Sennacherib king of the Assyrians turned, and
departed, and dwelt at Nineveh. ’ 
 38 And as he was worshipping the god of his fathers in the
house of N isroch, Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him
with swords; but they made good their escape into Armenia; and
Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead. ’ 
 XXXVIII. I And it came to pass at that time, Hezekiah
fell sick unto death; and Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz,
came unto him, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Give
orders concerning thine house; for thou diest, and shalt not live. 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 And Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto
the Lord, 
 3 And said, Ah LORD, remember, I pray thee, how that I have
walked before thee in truth and with whole heart, and have done
that which is good in thine eyes. And Hezekiah wept, a great
weeping. 
 4 And the word of the LORD came to Isaiah, saying, 
 5 Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the LORD, the God of
David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears:
behold, I am adding to thy days ﬁfteen years. 
 6 And I will deliver thee and this city out of the grasp of the
king of Assyria, and I will protect this city. 
 7 And this shall be the sign unto thee from the Lord, that the
LORD will do this thing which he hath spoken 
 8 Behold, I am turning the shadow of the steps, which it has
gone down on the steps. of Ahaz by the sun, ten steps back-
ward. And the sun returned ten steps, on the steps whereon it
was gone down. 
 9 Α writing of Hezekiah, king of Judah, when he had been
sick, and come to life from his sickness: 
 10 I said, In the stillness of my days I shall go into the gates
of hell; I am deprived of the residue of my years. 
 11 I said, I shall not see Jah, Jab in the land of the living;
Ι shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of ceasing. 
 12 My habitation is plucked up, and carried away from me like
a ’s tent. I have rolled up, like a weaver, my life; he ’
cutteth me off from the thrum; from day to night thou wilt make
an end of me. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 And Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto
the Lord, 
 3 Saying, Remember, Lord, how I have walked before thee
with truth, with a true heart, and have done that which is pleasing
in thy sight; and Hezekiah wept with great weeping. 
 4 And the word of the Lord came to Isaiah, saying, 
 5 Go, and tell Hezekiah, Thus saith the Lord, the God of
David thy father, I have heard the voice of thy prayer, and have
seen thy tears; behold, I add unto thy time ﬁfteen years: 
 6 And I will save thee out of the hand of the king of the
Assyrians, and I will hold a shield before this city. 
 7 And this is the sign to thee from the Lord, that God will
accomplish this word. 
 8 Behold, I turn the shadow of the steps, down which the sun
has gone, the ten steps of the house of thy father; I will turn the
sun back the ten steps. And the sun went up (again) the ten-
steps, down which the shadow had gone. ’ 
 9 [A song.] Prayer of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had
fallen sick, and arisen from his Sickness. 
 10 I said, At the height of my days, in the gates of hell I shall
leave the residue of my years. 
 11 Ι said, I shall no more see the salvation of God in the
land, I shall no more see man. 
 12 From among my kindred; I have left behind the residue
of my-life; it is gone forth and departed from me, like him
that looseth. his tent which he hath pitched; my spirit in me
became as a web, when she that weaveth draweth near to cut
it off. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 13 I quieted myself till morning; as a lion, so he breaketh
all my bones; from day to night thou wilt make an end of me. 
 14 Like a swift, a crane, so did I chatter; I did moan like a
dove; mine eyes failed towards the height; LORD, I am
oppressed; be thou surety for me. 
 15 What shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself
hath done it; I shall go softly all my years, because of the
bitterness of ’my soul. 
 16 O Lord, by these things men live, and wholly in them is
the life of my spirit; and thou wilt recover me, and make me to
live. 
 17 Behold, for peace it was bitter to me, bitter; and thou hast ’
loved my soul from the pit of destruction; for thou hast cast all
my sins behind thy back. 18 For hell cannot give thee thanks, death praise thee; they
that go down to the pit cannot hope for thy truth. 
 19 The living, the living, he shall give thee thanks, as I do
this day; the father shall. make the sons to know concerning thy
truth. 
 20 The LORD (was ready) to save me; and we will play on my
stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of the
LORD. 
 21 And Isaiah said, They shall take a cake of ﬁgs, and apply
it to the boil, and he shall live. 
 22 And Hezekiah said, What sign is there, that I shall go up
to the house of the LORD? ’ 
 XXXIX. I At that time Merodach Baladan, son of Baladan,
king of Babylon, sent a letter and a present to Hezekiah;
and he heard that he had been sick, and was recovered. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 13 In that day was I given over until morning, as to a lion ; so
hath he crushed all my bones; for from the day until night was
I given over. 
 14 As a swallow, so will I cry, and as a clove, so will I rehearse
it; for mine eyes have failed from looking up to the height of
heaven to the Lord, who rescued me, and took away the anguish
of my soul. 
 15 * * * * * * * 
 16 Ο Lord; yea, it was told thee concerning it, and thou
didst rouse up my breath, and I was comforted, and came to life. 
 17 For thou hast delivered my soul that it should not perish,
and hast cast away all my sins behind me. 
 18 For they that are in hell shall not praise thee, nor shall the
dead bless thee, nor they in hell hope_for thy mercy. 
 19 The living shall bless thee, as I also do ; for from today
will I beget children which shall declare thy righteousness, 
 20 O Lord of my salvation; and I will not cease blessing thee
upon the psaltery, all the days of my life, in front of the house of
God. 
 21 And Isaiah said to Hezekiah, Take a cake of ﬁgs, and
bruise it, and apply it as a plaister, and thou shalt be whole. 
 22 And Hezekiah said, This is the sign, that I shall go up into
the house of the Lord God. 
 XXXIX. I At that time Merodach, the son of Baladan,
king of Babylonia, sent a letter and envoys and presents to
Hezekiah; for he heard that he had fallen sick unto death, and
had arisen again. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 And Hezekiah was glad because of them, and shewed them
his treasure-house, the silver and the gold, and the spices, and the
ﬁne oil, and all his armoury, and all that was found among his
treasures; there was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion,
that Hezekiah showed them not. 
 3 Isaiah the prophet came unto king Hezekiah, and said
unto him, What said men, and whence came they unto thee?
And Hezekiah said, They came from a far country unto me, from
Babylon. 
 4 And he said, What have they seen in thine house? And
Hezekiah said, All that is in my house have they seen; there is
nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them. 
 5 And Isaiah said to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the Lord of
Hosts: 
 6 Behold, the days are coming, and all that is in thine house,
and that thy fathers have stored up until this day, shall be carried
to Babylon; nothing shall be left, saith the Lord 
 7 And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt
beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the
palace of the kings of Babylon. 
 8. And Hezekiah said to Isaiah, Good is the word of the Lord
which thou hast spoken. And he said, For there shall be peace
and truth in my days. 
 XL. 1 Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God. 
 2 Speak ye to the heart of Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that
her warfare is ﬁlled, that her guilt is satisfied; for she hath
received of the ’s hand double fOr all her sins. 
 

 
 2 And Hezekiah rejoiced with great joy over them, and showed
them the house of the treasury, and of the balsam, and the
incense, and the myrrh, and the silver, and the gold, and all the
houses of the vessels of the treasure, and all that was among his
treasures; and there was nothing which Hezekiah showed them
not in his house. 
 3 And Isaiah the prOphet came to the king Hezekiah, and said
to him, What say these men, and from whence are they come to
thee? And Hezekiah said, They are come from a land (from)
afar unto me, from Babylon. 
 4 And Isaiah said, What saw they in thine house? An
’Hezekiah said, They saw all that is in my house, and there is
nothing in my house which they saw not, but (they saw) even that
which is among my treasures: 
 5 And Isaiah said unto him, Hear the word of the Lord of
Hosts; 
 6 Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, and they shall take
all that is in thine house, and all that thy fathers gathered together
unto this day shall come to Babylon, and they shall leave nothing
behind; and God said, 
 7 They shall take also of thy children, which thou shalt beget,
and shall make them eunuchs in the house of the king of the
Babylonians. 
 8 And Hezekiah said to Isaiah, Good is Lord's word
which he hath spoken: let there be now peace and righteousness
in my days. 
 XL. 1 Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith the Lord. 
 2 Ye priests, speak ye to the heart of Jerusalem, comfort her,
for her humbling is ﬁlled, her sin is atoned for, for she hath
received of the ’s hand double of her sins. 
 
 
 

 
 3 A voice of one crying: In the wilderness clear ye the way
of the LORD, make level in the desert a highway for our God. 
 4 Every ’valley shall ’ exalted, and every mountain and hill
shall be brought low; and the rugged shall become a level, and
the rough places a plain: 
 5 And the glory of the LORD shall be revealed, and all ﬂesh
together shall see: forthe mouth of the LORD hath spoken it. 
 6 A voice of one saying, Cry! land he said, What shall I cry?
All flesh is grass, and all the goodness thereof like a ﬂower of the field. 
 7 The grass is withered, the ﬂower faded: because the breath
of the LORD hath blown upon it; surely the people is grass. 
 8 The grass is withered, the ﬂower faded; but the word of our
God shall stand for ever. 
 9 Get thee up upon a high mountain, thou that bringest good
tidings to Zion; lift up thy voice with strength, thou that bringest
good tidings to Jerusalem; lift it up, be not afraid! say unto the
cities of Judah, Behdld your God 
 10 Behold, the Lord GOD will come as a strong one, his
arm ruling for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his
recompense before him. 
 11 He shall feed his ﬂock like a shepherd: he shall gather
the lambs with his arm, and carry (them) in his bosom: he shall
tend those that give suck. 
 12 Who hath measured the waters with the hollow of his hand,
and meted out the heavens with the span, and comprehended the
dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in
a balance, and the hills in scales? 
 13 Who hath meted out the Spirit of the Lord, and, as the
man of his counsel, made him to know; 
 14 With whom took he counsel, and he caused him to discern,
and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him know-
ledge, and made him to know the way of discernment? 
 
 
 

 
 3 A voice, of one cryingiin the wilderness, Prepare ye the way
of the Lord, make straight the paths of our God. 
 4 Every valley shall be ﬁlled up, and every mountain and hill
shall be brought low; and the crooked places shall become
a straight (path), and the rough land smooth ways. 
 5 And the glory of the Lord shall be seen, and all ﬂesh shall
see the salvation of God, for the Lord hath spoken. 
 6 A voice of one saying, Cry! And I said, What shall I cry?
’All ﬂesh (is) grass, and all glory of man (is) as the ﬂower of
grass. 
 7 * * * * * 
 8 The grass is withered, and the ﬂower is fallen; but the word
of our God abideth for ever. 
 9 Go up upon a high mountain, thou that bringest good
tidings to Zion; lift up thy voice with thy strength, thou that
bringest good tidings to Jerusalem: lift ye up (your voice), fear
not; say thou to the cities of Judah, Behold your God. 
 10 Behold, the Lord cometh with strength, and his arm with
power: behold, his reward (is) with him, and his work before him. 
 11 As a shepherd shall he tend his ﬂock, and with his arm
shall he gather lambs, and shall comfort those with young. 
 12 Who measured the water with his hand, and the heaven
with a span, and all the earth with a handful? Who hath weighed
the mountains with a scale, and the valleys with a balance? 
 13 Who hath understood the mind of the Lord, and who was
his fellow-counsellor, that shall teach him? 
 14 Or with whom shared be his counsel, and he taught him?
or who showed him judgment? or who showed him the way of
understanding? or who gave to him at the ﬁrst, and it shall be
rendered him again? ’ 
 
 
 

 
 15 Behold, nations (are) as a drop from a bucket, and are
counted as a grain on the scales: behold, he will lift up the isles
as ﬁne dust. 
 16 And Lebanon is not sufficient for burning, nor its beasts
sufficient for (a burnt) sacrifice. 
 17 All the nations are as nothing before him, and are counted
to him as of nought, and waste. ’ 
 18 And to whom will ye liken God? and what likeness will ye
compare unto him? 
 19 The graven image, a craftsman melteth it, and the smelter]
’covereth it with gold, and smelteth silver chains. 
 20 He that is impoverished as to an offering chooseth a tree
that will not rot: he seeketh unto him a cunning craftsman, to
set up a graven image, that will not totter. 
 21 Do ye not know? do ye not hear? hath it not been told to
you from the beginning? have ye not discerned from the founda-
’of the earth? 
 22 He that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and its inhabitants
habitants are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as
ﬁne gauze, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in; 
 23 That giveth over chiefs to nothing; he maketh the judges
of the earth as waste. 
 24 Yea, they have not been planted, yea, they have not been
sown; yea, their stock hath not taken root in the earth; and he
- even bloweth upon them, and they wither, and a whirlwind taketh
’ - them away as stubble. 
 25 To whom then will ye liken me, and I shall be equal to
him? saith the Holy One. 
 26 Lift up your eyes on high, and see: who hath created
these? he who bringeth out their host by number; he calleth
them all by name, from the greatness of his might, and being
strong in power: not one is missing. 
 
 
 
 

 
 15 If all the nations had been reckoned as a drop from a jar,
or as the turn of a scale, shall they be reckoned even as spittle? 
 16 And Lebanon is not sufficient for burning, and all the (four
footed) beasts are not sufficient for a (whole) burnt offering. 
 17 And all the nations are as nothing, and are reckoned for
nothing. 
 18 To whom liken ye the Lord, and with what likeness liken
ye him? 
 19 Doth the craftsman make an image, or a goldsmith cast
gold, and gild it over? doth he construct of it a likeness? 
 20 For a craftsman chooseth out a tree which doth not rot,
and seeketh cunningly how to set up an image there: and that it
may not be moved. 
 21 Will ye not learn? will ye not hear? was it not proclaimed
to you from the beginning? have ye not learnt the foundations of
the earth? 
 22 (It is) he that holdeth the circle of the earth, and they that
dwell in it are as locusts; he that setteth up the heaven as
a canopy, and stretcheth it out as a tent to dwell in, 
 23 He that giveth rulers to rule as nothing, and he made the
earth as nothing. ’ 
 24 For they shall not sow, nor plant, neither shall their root be
rooted in the earth; he breatheth upon them, and they are
withered, and a tempest shall seize upon them as brushwood. 
 25 Now therefore to whom liken ye me, and I shall be exalted?
saith the Holy One. 
 26 Look up on high with your eyes, and see; who hath shown
forth all these things? he, that bringeth forth his array by number,
will call them all by name from the abundance of his glory, and in
the might of strength nothing faileth thee. 
 
 
 
 

 
 27 Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, My way
is hid from the LORD, and my judgment will pass away from my
God? 
 28 Hast thou not known, hast thou not heard? an everlasting
God is the LORD, the Creator of the ends of the earth; he fainteth
not, neither is—there is no searching of his— 
 29 Giving power to the weary; and to the powerless he in- ’
creaseth strength. ’ 
 30 And youths faint and are weary, and young men stumble: 
 31 But they that wait for the LORD shall renew strength; they
’shall lift up wings like the eagles: they shall run and not be
weary, they shall walk and not faint. 
 XLI. 1 Keep silence before me, O isles; and the peoples
shall renew strength; let them come near, then let them speak;
let us draw near together to judgment. 
 2 Who raised up from the East him (whom) Righteousness
calleth to his foot; gave up nations before him, maketh him
subdue kings; giveth them as dust for his sword, as driven
stubble for his bow? 
 3 He pursueth them, passeth on in peace: a path he shall not
go with his feet. 
 4 Who hath wrought and done it? He that calleth the gene-
rations from the beginning; I the LORD am the first, and with
the last, I am he. 
 5 The isles have seen it, and are afraid: the ends of the earth
tremble; they have drawn near, and come. ’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 27 For say not, Jacob, and why sayest thou, Israel, My way is
hid from God, and my God hath taken away my judgment, and
hath stood aloof 
 28 And now, hast thou not learnt? hast thou not heard? the
everlasting God, God who hath framed the ends of the earth, will
not hunger, nor grow—nor is there any ﬁnding out of his
understanding—. 
 29 Giving strength to the hungry, and pain to them that
suffer not. 
 30 For youths shall hunger, and young men shall be weary,
and chosen men shall be without strength: 
 31 But they that wait for the Lord shall renew their strength;
they shall put forth wings as eagles; they shall run, and shall not
be weary; they shall walk, and shall not hunger. 
 XLI. 1 Be made new. toward me, ye islands: for the rulers
shall renew their strength: let them draw near, and let them
speak together, then let them proclaim judgment. 
 2 Who roused up righteousness from the rising of the sun,
called it to his feet, it shall go forth? he shall set it before
nations, and shall astonish kings; and he shall lay their swords
upon the earth, and their bows as brushwood that is cast forth. 
 3 And he shall pursue them, and the way of his feet shall pass
over in peace. 
 4 Who hath wrought and done these things? he called it, that
called it from the beginning of generations; I, even God, am the
ﬁrst, and unto the times to come, I am. 
 5 The nations saw, and were afraid, the ends of the earth drew
near, and came together, 
 
 
 
 

 
 6 They help everyone his neighbour; and one saith to his
brother, Be strong! 
 7 And the craftsman strengthened the smelter, he that smootheth
with the hammer him that smiteth the anvil, saying of the soldering,
It is good: and he fasteneth it with nails, that it should
not totter. 
 8 And thou, Israel my sevant, Jacob whom I have chosen;
the seed of Abraham that loved me; 
 9 Thou on whom I have taken hold from the ends of the
earth, and called thee from the corners thereof; and said to thee,
Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not rejected thee. 
 10 Behold, all they that were hot against thee shall be
ashamed and cofounded; they shall be as nought, ans shall
perish, the men of thy strife. 
 12 Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, the men of
thy contention; the men of thy war shall be as nought, and as
nothingess. 
 13 For I, the LORD thy Gid, do hold fast thy right hadn; he
that saith to thee, Fear not, I have helped thee. 
 14 Fear not, thou worm Jacob, ye few men of Israel; I do
help thee, saith the LORD, and the Holy One of Israel is thy
redeemer. 
 15 Behold, I have set thee for a threshing sledge, sharp, new,
with edges; thou shalt thresh mountains, and grind them fine,
and shalt make hills as chaff. 
 16 Thou shalt winnow them, and the wind shall carry them
away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them; and thou shalt exult
in the LORD, shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel. 

 
 6 ’everyone to help his neighbour and his brother,
and he shall say, 
 7 The craftsman is strong, and the smith smiting with a
hammer, beating withal; then will he say, The joining is good,
’ they have made them strong with nails; they will set them in
place, and they shall not be moved. 
 8 But thou, Israel, (art) my servant, Jacob whom I have
chosen, the seed of Abraham whom I loved: 
 9 On whom I took hold from the ends of the earth, and called
thee fromthe watch towers thereof, and said to thee, Thou art my
servant; I have chosen thee, and not forsaken thee. 
 10 Fear not, for I am with thee; be not dismayedL for I am
thy God that strengtheneth thee; and I have helped thee, and
have saved thee from falling by my just right hand. 
 11 Behold, all they that resist thee shall be ashamed and
turned backward; for they shall be as though they were not, and
all thy adversaries shall perish. 
 12 Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not ﬁnd the men ’who
shall evil intreat thee; for they shall be as though they were not,
and they that war against thee shall cease to be. 
 13 For I am God, that hold fast thy right hand, that ’to
thee, Fear not, 
 14 Jacob, thou little Israel; I have helped thee, saith the
God that ransometh thee, Israel. 
 15 Behold, I make thee as wheels of a cart, that thresh out;
new, with teeth like a saw; and thou shalt thresh the mountains,
and beat small the hills, and shalt make them as dust. 
 16 And thou shalt winnow them, and a wind shall take them,
and a tempest shall scatter them. But thou shalt rejoice among
the holy things of Israel. 
 
 
 
 

 
 17 The afflicted and needy are seeking water, and there is
none; their tongue is parched with thirst: I the Lord will hear
them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them. 
 18 I will open rivers on bare heights, and fountains in the
midst of valleys; I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and
dry land springs of water. 
 19 I will give in the wilderness cedar, acacia, and myrtle, and
oil-tree; I will set in the desert ﬁr, plane, and larch together. 
 20 That they may see, and learn, and consider, and under-
stand together, that the hand of the LORD hath done this, and
the Holy One of Israel hath created it. 
 21 Bring near your cause, saith the LORD; bring up your
strengths, saith the King of Jacob. 
 22 Let them bring them up, and tell us what shall happen;
tell ye of the former things, what they be, that we may apply our
heart, and learn their issue; or make us to hear the things that
are coming. 
 23 Tell the things that are. to come hereafter, that, we may
learn that ye are gods; yea, do good and do evil, that we may
look around, and see (it) together. 
 24 Behold ye are of nought, and your work of nothingness:
an abomination is he that chooseth you. 
 25 I have roused up one from the north, and he came: from
the rising of the sun one that ’calleth on my name; and he shall
come upon rulers as morter, and as a ‘potter (that) treadeth clay. 
 26 Who hath told from the beginning, that we may know?
and from before, that we may say, It is right! Yea, there, is
nOne that telleth, yea none that maketh to be heard, yea none
that heareth your words. ’ 
 
 
 

 
 17 And the poor and the needy shall triumph. For they shall
seek water, and there shall be none; their tongue is dried up with
thirst. I the Lord God, I the God of Israel will hear, and will
not forsake them. 
 18 But I will open rivers upon the mountains, and fountains in
the midst of the plains; I will make the wilderness into pools,
and the thirsty land into watercourses. 
 19 I will plant in the waterless land cedar and box, and myrtle
and cypress, and white poplar; 
 20 That they may see, and learn, and understand, and know
together that the hand of the Lord hath done all this, and the
Holy One of Israel hath shown it forth. 
 21 Your judgment draweth near, saith the Lord God; your
counsels have drawn near, saith the King of Jacob. 
 22 Let them draw near, and declare unto you what shall come
to pass; or tell ye (of) the former things, what they were, and we
will apply our thoughts; and perceive what the last things be:
and tell us the things that are coming. 
 23 Declare the things that are coming at the last, and we shall
perceive that ye are gods: do good, and do evil, and we will
wonder. 
 24 For whence are ye, and whence is your working? from the
earth. As an abomination have they chosen you. 
 25 I have raised up him from the north, and him from the
rising of the sun; they shall be called by my name; let rulers.
come, and like clay of a potter, and like a potter treading clay, so
shall ye be trodden down. ’ 
 26 For who shall proclaim the things from, the beginning, that
we may learn them? or the former things, and we shall say that
they are true? there is none that foretelleth, nor any that heareth
your words. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 27 First to Zion, Behold, behold them; and to Jerusalem will
I give one that bringeth good tidings. 
 28 And I saw, and there was no man; and among these, and
there was no counsellor, that I should ask of them, and they
should answer a word. 
 29 Behold, they are all vanity; their works are ’;
their molten images are wind and wasteness. 
 XLII. I Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect,
(in whom) my soul is well pleased: I have put my soul upon
him; he shall bring forth judgment to the nations. 
 2 He shall not cry out, nor lift up, nor make his voice heard
in the street. 
 3 A bruised reed shall he not break, and a dimly burning wick
shall he not quench; according to truth shall he bring forth
judgment. 
 4 He shall not burn dimly nor be bruised, till he (shall) set
judgment in the earth; and the isles shall wait for his law. 
 5 Thus saith the God, the LORD, he that created the heavens,
and stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and the
things that come forth of it; that giveth breath unto the people
upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein: 
 6 Ι the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will take
hold of thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant
of the people, for -a light of the nations: 
 7 To open blind eyes, to bring out a captivefrom prison, and
them that sit in darkness from a house of confinement 
 8 Iam the Lord; that is my name; and my glory will I not
give to another, and my praise to graven images. 
 9 The ﬁrst things, behold, they have come, andI am telling
new things; before they spring up I cause you to hear of them. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 27 I will give rule to Zion, and will comfort Jerusalem in
the way. 
 28 For from the nations, behold, no man; and from among
their idols there was none that declared (aught), and if I ask of
them, Whence are ye? they will not answer me. 
 29 For they are those that make you, and vain are they that
lead you astray. 
 XLII. 1 Jacob my servant, on him will I take hold;
Israel (is) my chosen, my soul hath received him; I have put my
spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment for the nations. 
 2 He shall not cry out, nor send forth (his voice), nor shall his
voice be heard without. 
 3 A bruised reed shall he not crush, and smoking ﬂax shall he
not quench, but shall bring forth judgment unto truth. 
 4. He shall shine out, and shall not be shattered, until he have
iegpiudgment upon the earth; and in his name shall nations 
 5 Thus saith the Lord, the God who made the heaven and
ﬁxed it, who established the earth and the things therein, and
grave breath to the people upon it, and spirit to them that tread
thereon, 
 6 Ι the Lord God have called thee in righteousness, and will
hold fast thine hand, and will strengthen thee, and have given
I thee for a covenant of a race, for a light of nations. 
 7 To open blind ’s eyes, to lead out from bonds them that
are bound, and men that sit in darkness out of a prison house. 
 8 Ι am the Lord God: this is my name; my glory will I not
give to another, nor my excellences to the graven images. 
 9 The things from of old, behold, they are come; and new
things do I proclaim, and before they sprang up they were made
plain to you. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 10 Sing unto the Lord a new song, his praise from the end of
the earth; ye that go down (to) the sea, and the fulness thereof;
the isles, and the inhabitants thereof. 
 11 Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up (their
voice): the villages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants
of Sela shout, let them cry aloud from the top of mountains. 
 12 They shall give honour to the Lord, and tell his praise
among the isles. 
 13 The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall rouse
up zeal like a man of war: he shall shout, yea, roar; he shall
do mightily against his enemies. 
 14 I have been silent from of old: I have been still, and
refrained myself; (now) will I cry like a travailing woman; I will
gasp and pant together. 
 15 I will lay waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their
herbage; and I will turn rivers to islands, and I will dry up
pools. 
 16 And I will make the blind walk by a way that they knew
not; I will make them tread in paths they knew not; I will turn
darkness to light before them, and uneven places into a plain.
These are the things, I will do them, and will not abandon them. 
 17 They are turned back; they shall be ashamed, that
trust in the graven images, that say to the molten image, Ye are
our gods. 
 18 Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see. 
 19 Who is blind, but my servant, and deaf, but my messenger
whom I (shall) send? who is blind as the surrendered one, and
blind as the Lord's servant? 
 20 Thou hast seen many things, but thou observest Inot:
opening the ears, and he heareth not. 
 
 

 
 10 Sing unto the Lord a new song; it is his dominion; glorify
his name at the end of the earth, ye that go down unto the sea
and sail upon it: the isles, and the inhabitants thereof. 
 11 Be glad, O wilderness and the villages thereof; ye lodges,
and the inhabitants of Kedar. They that dwell in a rock shall be
glad, upon the tops of the mountains. 
 12 They shall give glory to God, they shall proclaim his excellence
in the isles. 
 13 The Lord, the God of powers, shall come forth, and shall
break war in pieces: he shall stir up jealousy, and shall shout
against his enemies with might. 
 14 I have been silent: shall I be silent even for ever, and hold
my peace? I endured, as she that travaileth; I will amaze, and
I will dry up together. 
 15 And I will turn rivers into islands, and will dry up
pools. 
 16 And I will lead blind men by a way that they had not
learnt, and will make them to tread paths which they knew not;
I will make their darkness into light, and the crooked things into
(a) straight (path); these (are) the things which I will do, and will
not forsake them. 
 17 But they turned away backward. Be utterly ashamed, ye
that trust in the graven images; that say to the molten images,
Ye are our gods. 
 18 Hear, ye deaf; and look up, ye blind, and see. 
 19 And who is blind, but my servants? and deaf, but they that
are lords over them? and the slaves of God are blinded. 
 20 Full oft have ye seen, and taken not heed; your ears are
opened, and ye heard not. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 21 The Lord was pleased for his righteousness’ sake: he
make the law great, and make it glorious. 
 22 And it is a people spoiled and robbed: snared in holes all
of them, and hidden in houses of confinement; they are for
a spoil, and there is none that delivereth; a prey, and none that
saith, Restore. 
 23 Who among you will give ear to this? will hearken, and
hear for the time to come? 
 24 Who gave up Jacob for a prey, and Israel to spoilers? was
it not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? And they
would not walk in his ways, and heard not his law. 
 25 And be poured upon him fury, his anger, and the violence
of war; and it set him on ﬁre round about, and he knew not;
and kindled upon him, and he laid it not to heart. 
 XLIII. I And now thus saith the Lord, that created thee,
O Jacob, and that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not; for I have
redeemed thee, I have called (thee) by thy name, thou (art) mine. 
 2 When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee;
and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou
walkest through the ﬁre, thou shalt not be scorched, and the
ﬂame shall not kindle upon thee. 
 3 For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy
Saviour; I have given Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba
in thy stead. 
 4 Since thou art (become) precious in mine eyes, hast been
honoured, and I have loved thee; therefore I will give man in thy
stead, and people for thy life. 
 5 Fear not; for I am with thee: I Will bring thy seed from
the East, and gather thee from the West: 
 6 I will say to the North, Give up; and to the South, Keep not
back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the end of
the earth: 
 
 

 
 21 The Lord God took counsel, that he might be justified, and
might magnify praise. 
 22 And I saw, and the people was plundered and spoiled; for
the snare is in treasuries everywhere, and in houses together;
where they hid themselves, they became a prey; and there was
none that set free a prey, and there was none that said, Restore. 
 23 Who is there among you that will give ear to this? he shall
hearken, for the time to come. 
 24 Who gave Jacob for a prey, and Israel to them that plunder
him? Is it not God, before whom they sinned, and they would
not walk in his ways, nor hear his law? 
 25 And he brought upon them the fury of his wrath, and war
overpowered them, and they that set them on fire round about,
and they understood not, each of them, neither laid it to heart. 
 XLIII. I And now thus saith the Lord God, who created
thee, O Jacob, he that formed thee, O Israel. Fear not, for
I have redeemed thee; I have called thee by thy name, thou art
mine. 
 2 Though thou pass through water, I am with thee, and rivers
shall not overwhelm thee; though thou go through ﬁre, thou shalt
not be burned, ﬂame shall not burn thee up. 
 3 For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy
Saviour; I have made Egypt and Ethiopia thy ransom, and set
Syene in thy stead. 
 4 Since thou hast become precious in my sight, thou hast been
glorified, and I have loved thee; and I will give many men on
behalf of thee, and rulers for thy head. 
 5 Fear not, for I am with thee; I will bring thy seed from the
East, and will gather thee from the West 
 6 I will say to the North, Bring (them); and to the South, Keep
not back: bring my sons from a land afar off, and my daughters
from the ends of the earth, 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 7 Everyone that is called by my name, and that I have created
for my glory; that I have formed, yea, have made. 
 8 Bring forth a blind people, and they have eyes; and deaf
ones, and they have ears. 
 9 All the nations are gathered together, and the peoples are
assembled: who among them will tell this, and cause us to hear
former things? let them produce their witnesses, and appear
righteous, and let them hear, and say, (It is) truth 
 10 Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant,
whom I have chosen; that ye may know, and believe me, and
discern that I am he; before me there was no God formed,
neither shall there be after me. 
 11 I, I am the Lord, and beside me is no Saviour. 
 12 Myself have told, and have saved, and have caused it to be
heard, and there was no stranger among you; and ye are my
witnesses, saith the Lord, and I am God. 
 13 Yea, from the beginning I am he: and there is none that
delivereth out of my hand: I will work, and who shall turn it
back? 
 14 Thus saith the Lord, your redeemer, the Holy One of
Israel: For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and will bring down
all of them as fugitives, and the Chaldaeans in the ships of their
shouting 
 15 I the Lord am your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your
King. 
 16 Thus saith the Lord, which giveth a way in the sea, and
a path in the mighty waters: 
 17 Which bringeth forth chariot and horse, force and warrior:
they lie down together, they shall not rise: they are quenched,
they are gone out like a wick: 
 
 

 
 7 All that have been called by my name. For in my glory
have I established him, and formed (him), and made him, 
 8 And I led forth a blind people, and their eyes are likewise
blind, and they are deaf, though they have ears, 
 9 All the nations are gathered together, and rulers shall be
gathered from among them; who shall declare these things?
or who shall declare to you what was from the beginning? let
them bring their witnesses, and let them be approved, and let
them speak truth, and let them hear. 
 10 Be ye witnesses to me, and I am witness, saith the Lord
God, and the servant whom I have chosen out; that ye may learn,
and believe me, and understand that I am; before me there came
no other God, and after me there shall be none. 
 11 I am God, and beside me there is no Saviour. 
 12 I declared, and I saved, I reproached, and there was no
stranger among you; ye are my witnesses, and I am witness, saith
the Lord God, 
 13 Even from the beginning, and there is none that delivereth
out of my hands: I will do it, and who shall turn it back? 
 14 Thus saith the Lord God who redeemeth you, the Holy One
of Israel: For your sakes will I send to Babylon, and will rouse up
all that ﬂee, and the Chaldaeans shall be bound in stocks. 
 15 I am the Lord, God your holy one, he that shewed forth
Israel your king. 
 16 Thus saith the Lord, that giveth a way in the sea, and a path
in the mighty water, 
 17 He that bringeth forth chariots, and horse, and a mighty
throng; but they have lain down, and shall not arise, they are
quenched as ﬂax that is quenched: 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 18 Remember ye not the ﬁrst things, neither consider the
things of old. 
 19 Behold, I do a new thing; now is it springing forth; will
ye not know it? Yea, I will set a way in the wilderness, rivers in
the desert. 
 20 The beast of the ﬁeld shall honour. me, jackals and
(daughters of) ostriches : for I have given ’waters in the wilderness,
rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen. 
 21 The people which 1,Ι have formed for myself, they shall
recount my praise. 
 22 And thou hast noi: called upon me, Jacob : for thou hast
been weary of me, O Israel. 
 23 Thou hast not brought me the’lambs of thy burnt offerings,
neither hast thou honoured me with tb’y sacriﬁces: I have not
caused thee to serve with a (meal) offering,nor wearied thee with .
incense. 
 24 Thou hast not bought me sweet cane with silver, neither
hast thou steeped me with the fat of thy sacriﬁces: only thou
hast caused me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with a
thine iniquities. 
 25 I, I am he that blotteth out thy rebellions for mine own
sake, and I will not remember thy sins. 
 26 Put me in remembrance; let us plead together: do thou
recount, that thou mayest appear righteous. 
 27 Thy ﬁrst father sinned, and thine interpreters rebelled ”
against me. 
 28 And I will profane princes of holiness, and will give up
Jacob to the ban, and Israel to reproaches. 
 
 
 

 
 18 Remember ye <not> the ﬁrst things, and consider not
things of old. 
 19 Behold, I do new things which shall now arise, and ye shall
learn them: and I will make a path in the desert, and rivers in
the waterless land: 
 20 The beasts of the ﬁeld shall praise me, owls, and the
daughters of ostriches; because I have given water in the desert,
and rivers in the waterless land, I will give my chosen race to
drink, 
 21 My people, whom I have preserved to set forth my
excellences. 
 22 Not now have I called thee, Jacob, nor made thee weary,
Israel: 
 23 No sheep have I of thy offering, nor didst thou glorify me
in thy sacrifices, nor serve in thy sacrifices; nor have I wearied
thee with frankincense, 
 24 Neither didst thou buy for me incense for silver, nor did
I desire the fat of thy offerings; but in thy sins and in thine
unrighteousness I stood before thee. 
 25 I am, I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions and will
not remember thine unrighteousnesses. 
 26 But do thou remember, and let us be judged; tell thou
ﬁrst thy transgressions, that thou mayest be justified. 
 27 Our fathers ﬁrst, and their rulers transgressed against me? 
 28 And the rulers defiled my holy things; and I gave Jacob
over to destroy (him) and Israel for a reproach. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 XLIV. 1 And now hear, O Jacob my servant; and Israel,
whom I have chosen; 
 2 Thus saith the Lord that made thee, and formed thee from
the womb, that will help thee: Fear not, O Jacob my servant, and
(thou) Jeshurun, whom I have chosen. 
 3 For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and flowing
streams upon the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon them that go forth of thee. 
 4 And they shall spring up in the midst of the grass, as
willows by the water courses. 
 5 This one shall say, I am the ’s; and this shall call on
the name of Jacob; and this shall write with his hand, The Lord's
and entitle, In the name of Israel. 
 6 Thus saith the Lord, the King of Israel, and his redeemer,
the Lord of Hosts; I am the ﬁrst, and I, am the last; and beside
me there is no God. 
 7 And who, as I, shall call, and shall tell it, and state it in
order for me? since I set up the people of old time? and things
which are coming, and things which shall come, let them tell it to
them. 
 8 Shudder not, and fear not: have I not caused thee to hear,
from that time, and told it? and ye are my witnesses. Is there
a God beside me? and there is no Rock: I know not (any). 
 9 They that form a graven image are all of them waste; and
their desirable things shall not profit; and their witnesses, they
see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed. 
 10 Who hath formed a god, and molten a graven, image, to no
profit? 
 11 Behold, all his company shall be ashamed; and the craftsmen,
they are of men; they shall all be gathered together, they
shall stand up; they shall fear, they shall be ashamed together. 
 
 

 
 XLIV. 1 But now hear, Jacob my servant, and Israel,
whom I chose (out). 
 2 Thus said the Lord God who made thee, and he that formed
thee from the womb, Thou shalt yet be helped: fear not, my
servant Jacob, and my beloved Israel whom I chose (out); 
 3 For I will give water in thirst to them that walk in a waterless
place; I will put my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessings upon thy children, 
 4 And they shall rise up as grass among water, and as a willow
by the side of a ﬂowing water. 
 5 This one shall say, I am God's, and this shall speak in the
name of Jacob; and another writeth, I am God's; upon the name
of Israel. 
 6 Thus saith God, the King of Israel, and his deliverer, God
of Hosts; I am ﬁrst, and I am hereafter; except me there is no
God. 
 7 Who is as I am? let him stand, let him call, and make ready
for me, since I made man for everlasting; and let them declare
to you the coming things before they come. 
 8 Hide not yourselves; did ye not give ear from the beginning,
and I declared it to you? ye are witnesses, whether there be a God
beside me; and they were not, at that time. 
 9 They that mould images, and that grave, are all of them
vain; they that make their own delights, which shall not help
them; but they shall be ashamed, 
 10 All they that mould a god, and grave unprofitable things: 
 11 And all are withered from whence they sprang, and (are)
dumb from among men; let them all be gathered together, and
they shall stand together, let them be turned backward and be
ashamed together. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 12 The craftsman in iron (hath) an adze, and worketh in the
coals, and formeth it with hammers, with the arm of his strehgth
moreover he is hungry, and there is no strength: he drinketh no
water, and is faint. 
 13 The craftsman in wood stretcheth out a line, he marketh it
with a pencil; he shapeth it with planes, and marketh it out with
the compass; and maketh it like the ﬁgure of a man, like the
beauty of mankind: to dwell in a house. 
 14 He will hew him down cedars, and taketh ilex and oak, and
strengtheneth for himself (one) among the trees of the forest: he
planteth a pine, and the rain maketh it great. 
 15 And it shall be for man for burning: and he taketh of them,
and warmeth himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea,
he fashioneth a god, and boweth himself; he maketh it a grav
image, and falleth down thereto. 
 16 He burneth half thereof in the ﬁre: with half thereof he
eateth ﬂesh: he roasteth roast, and is satisfied; yea, he warmeth
himself, and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen ﬁre: 
 17 And the remainder thereof he maketh to be a god, to be
his (graven) image 3 he falleth down unto it, and boweth himself,
and prayeth unto it, saith, Deliver me 3 for thou (art) my god. 
 18 They know not, and they discern not; for one hath daubed
their eyes, that they see not, and their hearts, that they
consider not. 
 19 And he recalleth it not to his heart, and there is no knowledge,
and no discernment to say, I have burned half of it in the
ﬁre, and also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof: I have
roasted ﬂesh and eaten it: and shall I make the residue thereof
an abomination? shall I bow myself to the produce of a tree? 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 12 For the craftsman sharpeneth iron, with an adze he
fashioneth it, and boreth it with a gimlet, worketh it with the arm
of his strength; and he shall be hungry, and shall be faint, and
not drink water: 
 13 The craftsman when he hath chosen a piece of wood, setteth
it up by measure, and ﬁtteth it together with glue; he maketh it
like the form of a great man, and like the goodliness of man, to set
it up in a house: 
 14 He cutteth wood out of the forest which the Lord planted,
and the rain made it to grow, 
 15 That it may be for men for burning; and he taketh thereof,
and is warmed; and they burn it, and bake loaves upon it; and
the rest he maketh into gods, and they worship them. 
 16 Whereof he burneth half in the ﬁre (and they burn them,
and bake loaves upon them), and roasteth meat upon it, and eateth,
and is ﬁlled: and when he is warmed, he saith, Sweet is it to me
that I am warmed, and have seen ﬁre. 
 17 But the rest of it he maketh a graven god, and worshippeth
it, and prayeth to it, saying, Deliver me, for thou art my god. 
 18 They have not learnt to have understanding, for they are
darkened, from seeing with their eyes, and understandingwith their
heart. 
 19 And he considereth not in his heart, nor pondereth in
his soul, nor perceiveth with his understanding, that he hath
burned half thereof in the fire, and baked loaves upon the ashes
thereof, and roasted meat, and eaten; and made the rest of it into
an abomination, and they worship it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 20 He is a feeder on ashes; a deluded heart hath turned him
aside, and he delivereth not his soul, nor saith, Is there not a lie
in my right hand? 
 21 Remember these things, O Jacob; and Israel, for thou art
my servant; I have formed thee, thou art my servant: Israel,
thou shalt not be forgotten of me. 
 22 I have blotted out, as a mist, thy rebellions, and as
a cloud thy sins; return unto me; for I have redeemed
thee. 
 23 Sing, O ye heavens, for the Lord hath done it; shout, ye
lowest parts of the earth; break forth, ye mountains, into
singing; the forest, and every tree therein; for the Lord hath
redeemed Jacob, and will beautify himself in Israel. 
 24 Thus saith the Lord, thy redeemer, and he that formed
thee from the womb, I am the Lord, that maketh all things; that
stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth forth the earth:
who was with me? 
 25 That shattereth the signs of the praters, and diviners he
will madden; that tumeth wise men backward, and maketh their
knowledge foolish: 
 26 That setteth up the word of his servant, and fulfilleth the
counsel of his messengers: that saith to Jerusalem, She shall be
inhabited, and to the cities of Judah, They shall be built, and
I will set up the wastes thereof: 
 27 That saith to the deep, Be wasted, I will dry up thy
rivers: 
 28 That saith to Cyrus, My shepherd, and all my pleasure
shall he fulfil; 3 and saying to Jerusalem, She shall be built, and
a temple shall be founded. 
 
 
 
 

 
 20 Learn ye that their heart is ashes, and they wander out of
the way, and no one can deliver his soul; see, ye will not say,
There is a lie in my right hand. 
 21 Remember this, Jacob, and Israel, for thou art my
servant; I formed thee for my servant, and thou, Israel, forget
not me. 
 22 For behold, I have blotted out thy transgressions as a cloud,
and thy sins as darkness; turn thou to me, and I will redeem
thee. 
 23 Rejoice, ye heavens, for God hath had mercy upon Israel:
sound the dumpet, ye foundations of the earth; shout, ye mountains,
in joy, ye hills, and all the trees upon them; for the Lord
hath had mercy on Jacob; and Israel shall be glorified. 
 24 Thus saith the Lord, that redeemeth thee, and formeth
thee from the womb, I am the Lord, that accbmplish this; I alone
stretched out the heaven, and established the earth. 
 25 Who else scattered the signs of ventriloquists, and divinations
from the heart? turning wise men backward, and making
foolish their counsel? 
 26. And establishing the words of his servants, and making true
the counsel of his messengers? he that saith to Jerusalem, Thou
shalt be inhabited, and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built;
and her desolate places shall arise: 
 27 That saith to the deep, Thou shalt be made desolate, and
I will dry up thy rivers: 
 28 That biddeth Cyrus be wise, and saith, He shall perform all
my desires; that saith Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built, and
I will lay the foundation of my holy house. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 XLV. 1 Thus saith the LORD to his anointed, to Cyrus, of
whose right hand I have taken hold, to bring down nations before
him, and I will loose the loins of kings, to loose before his face
two-leaved doors, and gates shall not be shut: 
 2 I will go before thee, and make swelling ground a
I will break in pieces doors of brass, and cut in sunder bars of
iron: 
 3 And I will give thee treasures of darkness, and hidden things
of secret places, that thou mayest know that I am the Lord, which
call thee by thy name, the God of Israel. 
 4 For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel's mine elect, therefore
I have called thee by thy name: I have named thee
honourably, and thou hast not known me. 
 5 I am the Lord, and there is none else: there is no God.
beside me: I have girded thee, and thou hast not known me. 
 6 That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from
the setting thereof, that there is none beside me. I am the Lord,
and there is none else, 
 7 That form light, and create darkness, that make peace, and
create evil: I am the Lord, that do all these things 
 8 Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour
down righteousness; let the earth open, and let them bring forth
salvation, and let her cause righteousness to spring up together:
I the Lord have created it. 
 9, Ah, he that. striveth with him that formed him ! a potsherd
among potsherds of the ground. Shall the clay say to the potter,
What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands! 
 
 
 

 
 XLV. 1 Thus saith the Lord God to my anointed, Cyrus,
on whose right hand <I have> taken hold, for nations to submit
before him; and I will shatter the strength of kings, I will open
doors before him, and cities shall not be shut 
 2 I will go before him, and will level mountains, will break
down doors of brass, and will snap asunder bolts of iron 
 3 And I will give thee treasures of darkness, I will open to
thee hidden (treasures) <unseen>, that thou mayest learn
I am the Lord that call thy name, the God of Israel. 
 4 For my servant Jacob's sake, and Israel's whom I have
chosen, I will call thee by thy name, and will receive thee; but
thou knewest not me. 
 5 For I am the Lord God, and there is no other God beside
me; and they knew me not. 
 6 That they from the rising of the sun, and they from the
going down (thereof) may learn, that there is none beside me
and that I am the Lord God, and there is none other, 
 7 I, that establish light, and make darkness, that make peace,
and create evils: I am the Lord God that doeth all these things. 
 8 Let the heaven from above rejoice, and let the clouds shower
down righteousness: let the earth bring forth and make mercy to
spring up, and let righteousness spring up together. I am the
Lord that created thee. 
 9 What better things have I set up, as clay of the potter?
shall the plowman plow the earth? shall the clay say to the
potter, What doest thou, for thou workest not, neither hast
hands? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 10 Ah, he that saith unto a father, What begettest thou? or to
a woman, Wherewith travailest thou? 
 11 Thus saith the Lord, the Holy one of Israel, and he that
formed him; Ask me of coming things concerning my sons, and
command me concerning the work of my hands. 
 12 I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, my
hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I
commanded. 
 13 I have roused him up in righteousness, and I will level all
his ways: he shall build my city, and he shall send forthl my
captivity, not for hire, and not for a present, saith the Lord of
hosts. 
 14 Thus saith the Lord, The labour of Egypt, and the merchandise
of Ethiopia, and the Sabeans, men of stature, shall pass
over unto thee, and becOme thine; they shall go after thee, in
chains shall they pass over, and they shall bow down to thee, they
shall pray unto thee: Only in thee is God, and there is none else,
no God at all. 
 15 Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel,
Saviour. 
 16 They are ashamed and also confounded, all of them; the
craftsmen of idols are gone into confusion together. 
 17 Israel is saved in the Lord with everlasting salvation: ye
shall not be ashamed nor confounded to all eternity. 
 18 For thus saith the Lord that created the heavens; (he is
God:) that formed the earth, and made it: he set it in order; he
created it not a waste, he formed it to be inhabited: I am the
Lord, and there is none else. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 10 He that saith to the father, What wilt thou beget? or to the
mother, Where wilt thou travail ? 
 11 For thus saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, that
maketh the things to come; Ask ye me concerning my sons and
concerning my daughters, and concerning the works of my hands
give me a charge. 
 12 I made the earth, and man upon it; I with my hand
established the heaven, I commanded all the stars. 
 13 I raised him up with righteousness, and all his ways (shall
be) straight; he shall build my city, and shall turn the captivity
of my people, not with ransom, nor with gifts, saith the Lord of
hosts. 
 14 Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Egypt is weary, and the
merchandise of the Ethiopians: and the men of Saba, men of
lofty stature, shall pass over unto thee, and shall slaves unto
thee, and shall follow behind thee, bound with manacles, and
worship before thee, and in thee shall they pray: for in thee is
God, and they shall say, There is no God beside thee. 
 15 For thou an God, and we knew it not, O God of Israel,
Saviour. 
 16 All they that resist him shall be ashamed, and turned back-
ward, and shall walk in shame. Be ye made new toward me, ye
isles. 
 17 Israel is being saved by the Lord with an everlasting
salvation; they shall not be ashamed, nor be turned backward
for ever. 
 18 Thus saith the Lord, that made the heaven:—he is the
that showed forth the earth and made it, he himself set its
bounds; he made it not for a void, but to be inhabited: I am,
and there is none beside. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 19 I have not, spoken in secret, in a place of the land of
darkness 3 I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me, (as in)
a waste: I the Lord speak righteousness, I declare things that
are right. 
 20 Assemble yourselves, and come; draw near together, ye
escaped of the nations; they know not, that carry the wood of
their graven image, and pray unto a God that cannot save. 
 21 Declare ye, and bring near: yea, let them take counsel
together; who hath caused this to be heard from of old, hath
declared it from that time? Is it not I, the Lord? and there is
no God else beside me: a righteous God and a Saviour; there is
none except me. 
 22 Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth
for I am God, and there is none else. 
 23 I have sworn by myself, a word is gone forth from a mouth
of righteousness, and it shall not return, that unto me every knee
shall bow, every tongue shall swear. 
 24 Only in the Lord, saith one, have I righteousness and
strength; unto him shall one come, and all that were inflamed
against him shall be ashamed. 
 25 In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be held righteous,
and boast themselves. 
 XLVI. 1 Bel croucheth down, Nebo stoopeth; their idols
are for beast and cattle; the things ye carried are borne heavily,
a burden to the weary. 
 
 

 
 19 I have not spoken in secret, nor in a dark place of the
earth ; -Ῑ said not to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye a vain thing; Ι
am, I am one that speaketh righteousness, and declareth truth. 
 20 Be gathered together, and come ye, take counsel together,
ye that are being saved from among the nations. They had not
learnt, they that lift up the wood, their graving, and pray as to
gods that save not. 
 21 If they do declare it, let them draw near, that they may
learn together, who made these things to be heard, from the
beginning: then was it declared unto you, I am God, and there
is none other but me; righteous and a saviour, there is none
except me. , 
 22 Turn ye to me, and ye shall be saved, ye that are from the
_ end of the earth ; I am God, and there is none other. 
 23 By myself I swear, that righteousness shall go forth from
my mouth; my words shall not be turned back; that unto me
shall every knee bow, and every tongue shall swear by God, 
 24 Saying, Righteousness and glory shall come unto him, and
all they that separate themselves shall be ashamed. ’ ’ 
 25 From the Lord shall men be justiﬁed, and in God shall all
the seed of the children of Israel be gloriﬁed; 
 XLVI. I Fallen is Bel, crushed into pieces is Dagon: their
graven images were for wild beasts, and beasts of burden; lift
them up bound as a load for one that is weary and hungry, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 They stoop, they crouch together; they cannot deliver the
burden, their soul is gone into captivity. 
 3 Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of
the house of Israel: which are heavily borne from the womb,
which are carried from the bosom: 
 4 And to old age I am he, and to grey hairs I will support; I
have made, and I will carry; and I will support, and will deliver
you. 
 5 To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare
me, and we shall be like? 
 6 They that pour forth gold from the bag, and weigh silver
with the balance; they hire a goldsmith, and he maketh it a god:
they fall down, yea, they bow themselves. 
 7 They lift him upon the shoulder; they support him, they set
him in his place, and he standeth; he moveth not from his place;
yea, one shall cry unto him, and he shall not answer, he shall not
save him from his distress, 
 8 Remember this, and stand ﬁrm; recall it to mind, O ye rebels. 
 9 Remember the ﬁrst things of old: for I am God, and there
is none else; God, and there is none like me. 
 10 Declaring the after-things from the beginning, and from of
old what is not done; saying, My purpose shall stand, and I will
do all my pleasure: 
 11 Calling a bird of prey from the east, the man of his counsel
from a far country: yea, I have spoken, yea, I will bring it to
pass: I have purposed it, I will also do it. 
 12 Hearken unto me, ye stout of heart, that are far from
righteousness; 
 13 I bring near my righteousness: it shall not be far off, and
my salvation shall not tarry; and I will give in Zion salvation, for
Israel my glory. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 And enfeebled, without strength also; who shall not be able
to be saved from war, but themselves were led captive. 
 3 Hear ye me, house of Jacob, and all the remnant of Israel,
that are carried from the womb, and reared up from a child. 
 4 Until old age I am, and until ye grow old, I am; I bear
with you, I made you, and I will let you (go) free, I will take you
up, and will save you. 
 5 To whom have ye likened me? See ye, deal cunningly, ye
that are led astray: 
 6 Ye that contribute gold out of a bag, and silver by balance
they will set it in a scale, and when they have hired a goldsmith,
they make works of their hands, and bow down, and worship
them. 
 7 They lift it upon the shoulders, and walk; and if they set it
down, it remaineth in his place, it shall not stir; and whosoever
calleth unto him, he shall not hear, he shall not save him from
evils. 
 8 Remember this, and lament; repent, ye that have gone
V astray, turn with your heart. 
 9 And remember the former things from eternity; for I am
God, (and there is none beside me :) 
 10 Declaring the last things before they come to pass, and
therewith they are fulfilled; and I said, All my counsel shall
sand, and all that I have counselled will I do. 
 11 Calling a fowl of the air from the East, and from a land
afar off them concerning whom I have counselled; I spake, and
led him, I created and made, I led him, and made his way plain: 
 12 Hearken to me, ye that have lost your heart, ye that are
far from righteousness. 
 13 I have brought near my righteousness, and the salvation
that cometh from me will I not delay: I have given salvation in
Zion to Israel for a glorifying. 
 
 

 
 XLVII. I Come down, and sit in the dust, O Virgin
daughter of Babylon: sit on the earth, there is no throne, O
daughter of the Chaldaeans; for thou shaltno more be (one)
they call tender and delicate. 
 2 Take the millstones, and grind meal; take off thy veil, lift
up thy train, uncover the leg, pass through rivers. 
 3 Let thy nakedness be uncovered, yea, let thy shame be seen;
I will take vengeance, and I will not meet man. 
 4 Our redeemer, the LORD of Hosts is his name, the Holy One
of Israel. 
 5 Sit in silence, and go into darkness, O daughter of the
Chaldaeans; for thou shalt no more be (one) they call lady of
kingdoms. 
 6 I was wroth with my people, I profaned mine inheritance,
and gave them into thy hand; thou didst shew them no mercy;
upon the aged thou didst make thy yoke exceeding heavy. 
 7 And thou saidst, I shall be a lady for ever: until thou didst
not lay these things to thine heart, thou didst not remember the
latter end of it. 
 8 And now hear this, thou given to pleasure, that sittest
securely, that sayest in thine heart, I and none else beside: I
shall not sit a widow. neither shall I know bereavement. 
 9 And these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one
day, bereavement, and widowhood: they shall come upon thee in
full measure, for the multitude of thy ’orceries, for the exceeding
number of thy spells. 
 10 And thou hast been secure in thine evil: thou hast said,
There is none that seeth me; thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it
hath turned thee aside; and thou hast said in thine heart, I, and
none else beside. 
 
 
 
 

 
 XLVII. 1 Come down, sit upon the ground, virgin daughter
of Babylon; enter into the darkness, daughter of the Chaldaeans,
for no longer shalt thou. be any more called tender and delicate. 
 2 Take a millstone, grind meal, take off thy covering, uncover
thy grey hairs, make bare the legs, pass through rivers. 
 3 Thy shame shall be uncovered, thy reproaches shall appear;
I will do justice upon thee, no longer will I deliver thee over
unto men, 
 4 Saith thy deliverer, the Lord of Hosts, his name is the Holy
One of Israel. 
 5 Sit down in amazement, enter into the darkness, daughter of
the Chaldaeans: no longer shalt thou be called the strength of a kingdom. 
 6 I was provoked at my people, thou defiledst mine inheritance:
I gave (them) into thine hand, and thou showedst them no mercy;
thou didst make the yoke of the elder very heavy. 
 7 And thou saidst, I shall be a princess for ever; thou per-
ceivedst not this in thy heart, neither didst remember the last
things. 
 8 But now hear this, delicate one, that sittest, that art confident
that sayest in thine heart, I am, and there is none other; I shall
not sit as a widow, nor shall I come to know bereavement. 
 9 But now shall there come suddenly these two things in one
day, childlessness and widowhood shall come suddenly upon thee
in thy witchcraft; in the strength of thy enchantments exceeding
greatly, 
 10 In the hope of thy wickedness; for thou saidst, I am, and
there is no other: learn thou, that the understanding of these
things and thy harlotry shall be thy shame: and thou saidst in
thine heart, I am, and there is no other. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 And evil shall come upon thee; thou shalt not know the
dawning thereof; and ruin shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be
able to avert it: and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly,
(which) thou shalt not know. 
 12 Stand forth, I pray, with thy spells, and with the multitude
of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth:
peradventure thou wilt be able to profit, peradventure thou wilt
strike terror. 
 13 Thou art wearied with the multitude of thy counsels: let
them, I pray thee, stand forth and save thee—they who
the heavens, who gaze on the stars, who make known at the new
moons—from what shall come upon 
 14 Behold, they are become as stubble, ﬁre hath burned them;
they shall not deliver their soul from the hand of the ﬂame; it is
no coal to be warm, ﬁre to sit before. 
 15 Thus are the things to thee wherein thou hast laboured:
thy traffickers from thy youth go astray everyone his own way:
there is none that saveth thee. 
 XLVIII. 1 Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called
by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of
Judah; which swear by the name of the LORD, and make mention
of the God of Israel, not in truth, and not in righteousness. 
 2 For they are called of the holy city, and lean upon the God
of Israel: the Lord of Hosts is his name. 
 3 I have declared the ﬁrst things from that time; and they
went forth out of my mouth, and I showed them; I wrought
suddenly, and they came to pass. 
 4 Because I knew that thou art hard, and thy neck is an iron
sinew, and thy brow brass: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 And there shall come upon thee destruction, and thou
shalt not perceive it; a pit, and thou shalt fall into it: and there
shall come misery upon thee, and thou shalt not be able to be
clear of it: and there shall come destruction suddenly upon thee,
and thou shalt not perceive it. 
 12 Stand now in thine enchantments, and thy abundant witch-
craft, which thou didst learn from thy youth, (to see) if thou
canst be helped: 
 13 Thou hast grown weary in thy counsels: let the astrologers
of the heaven stand and save thee; let them who look on the
stars declare to thee what is purposed to come upon thee. 
 14 Behold, all shall be burnt up as brushwood upon a ﬁre, and
they shall not deliver their soul from the ﬂame; since thou hast
coals of ﬁre, sit thereon. 
 15 These shall be thy help: thou didst weary thyself in thy
traffic from thy youth: each went astray by himself; but for thee
shall be no salvation. 
 XLVIII. 1 Hear ye this, house of Jacob, ye that are called
by the name of Israel, and that have come forth from Judah, ye
that swear by the name of the Lord God of Israel, calling him to
mind not with truth, nor with righteousness, 
 2 And holding by the name of the holy city, and staying yourselves
upon the God of Israel: the Lord of Hosts is his name. 
 3 Still haveI-declared the former things, and out of my mouth
went they forth, and came to be heard: I did them suddenly, and
they came to pass. 
 4 I perceive that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron
sinew, and thy brow brass. 
 
 
 

 
 5 Therefore I have from that time declared it to thee 3 before
it came to pass I showed it thee; lest thou shouldest say, Mine
idol hath done them, and my graven image, and my molten
image, hath commanded them. 
 6 Thou hast heard 3 see it all: and ye, will not ye declare it?
I have caused thee to hear new things from now, and things
reserved, and thou didst not know them. ‘ 
 7 They are created now, and not from that time 3 and before
to-day, and thou heardest them not 3 lest thou shouldest say,-
Behold, I knew them. 
 8 Nay, thou hast not heard 3 nay, thou hast not known 3 nay,
from that. time thine ear opened not 3 for I knew that thou
gigs; (33:1 very treacherously, and wast‘ called a rebel from
the womb. 
 9 For my name’s sake I defer mine anger, and for my praise
do I refrain it for thee, that I cut thee not off. 
 10 Behold, I have reﬁned thee, and not as silver; I have
chosen thee in the furnace of affliction. 
 11 For mine own sake, for mine own sake, will I do (it) 3 for
how is it profaned? and I will not give my glory unto another. 
 12 Hearken unto me, Jacob, and Israel my called: I am he,
I am the ﬁrst, I also am the last. 
 13 Mine hand also laid the foundation of the earth, and my
’ right hand spread out the heavens; I call unto them, they will
stand up together. · 
 14 All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them
declared these things? The LORD hath loved him: he will do
lgiausre on Babylon, and his arm (shall be) on the
Chaldaeans. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 And I declared to thee the things of old, before they came
upon thee; I made it to be heard of thee, lest thou shouldest
say, Mine idols have done it, and say, The graven and the
molten images have commanded me. 
 6 Ye have heard all, and ye perceived not; but I have also
made to be heard of thee the new things from henceforth which
shall come to pass; and thou saidst not, 
 7 Now come they to pass, and not long since, and not in
former days didst thou hear of them; lest thou shouldest say,
Yea, I perceive them. 
 8 Thou didst neither perceive nor know, nor did I open thine
ears from the beginning; for I perceived that thou wouldest
utterly set them at nought, and thou shalt be called a transgressor
even from the womb. 
 9 For my name's sake will I show thee my wrath, and my
glorious deeds will I bring upon thee, that I may not utterly
destroy thee. 
 10 Behold, I have sold thee, not for silver; and I delivered
thee out of the furnace of beggary. 
 11 For mine own sake will I do it unto thee; for my name is
polluted, and my glory will I not give to another. 
 12 Hear me, Jacob, and Israel, whom I call; I am ﬁrst, and I
am for everlasting: 
 13 And my hand laid the foundation of the earth, and my
right hand established the heaven; I will call them, and they
shall stand together. 
 14 And all shall be gathered together, and shall hearken.
Who declared these things unto them? Because I loved thee,
I did this upon Babylon, thy will, to destroy the seed of the
Chaldaeans. 
 
 
 

 
 15 I, I, have spoken; yea, I have called him; I have brought
him, and he shall make his way prosperous. 
 16 Draw near unto me, hear ye this; not from the beginning
have I spoken in secret; from the time that it was, there am I
and now the Lord God, and his spirit, hath sent me. 
 17 Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of
Israel: I am the Lord thy God, which teacheth thee to profit.
which leadeth thee by the way thou shouldest walk. 
 18 O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! and
’ thy peace had been as the river, and thy righteousness as the
waves of the seal 
 19 And thy seed had been as the sand, and the offspring of
thy bowels like the grains thereof: his name should not be cut off
nor destroyed before me. 
 20 Go ye forth of Babylon, ﬂee ye from the Chaldaeans; with
a voice of singing declare ye, make this heard, send it forth to
the end of the earth; say ye, The Lord hath redeemed his
servant Jacob. 
 21. And they thirsted not in the deserts (where) he made them
go; he caused the waters to ﬂow out Of the rock for them; and
he clave the rock, and the waters gushed out. 
 22 There is no peace, saith the Lord, to the wicked. 
 XLIX. 1 Hearken, ye isles, to me, and listen, ye peoples,
from afar; the Lord hath called me from the. womb; from the
bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name. 
 2 And he made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow
of his hand he hid me; and set me for a polished arrow; in his
quiver be concealed me, 
 
 
 
 

 
 15 I spake, I called him, led him, and made his way prosperous. 
 16 Draw near unto me, and hear ye this; from the beginning
have I not spoken in secret, nor in a dark place of the earth;
when it came to pass, there was I, and now the Lord hath sent
me, and his spirit. 
 17 Thus saith the Lord, thy deliverer, the Holy One of Israel:
<I am thy God,> I have shown to thee, that thou mayest
way wherein thou shalt walk. 
 18 And if thou hadst hearkened to my commandments, thy
peace should have been made as a river, and thy righteousness
as a wave of the sea; 
 19 And thy seed should have becoine as sand, and the off
spring of thy womb as the dust of the earth; nor shalt thou now
be utterly destroyed, nor shall thy name perish before me. 
 20 Come thou forth from Babylon, ﬂeeing from the Chaldaeans;
proclaim ye the voice of joy, and let this be heard,
report it to the end of the earth; say ye, The Lord hath
delivered his people Jacob. 
 21 And if they be thirsty, he will bring them through the
wilderness, he will bring water for them out of a rock; a rock
shall be cleft, and water shall ﬂow, and my people shall drink. 
 22 There is no rejoicing, saith the Lord, for the wicked. 
 XLIX. 1 Hearken to me, ye isles, and attend to me, ye
nations; after long time shall it stand, saith the Lord. From my
’s womb he called my name, 
 2 And set my mouth as a sharp sword, and under the shelter
of his hand he hid me; he made me as a chosen arrow, and in
his quiver he sheltered me, 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom
I will glorify myself. 
 4 And I said, I have laboured in vain, for waste and vanity
have I consumed my strength; surely my judgment is with the
Lord, and my recompense with my God. 
 5 And now, saith the Lord, that formed me from the womb
for a servant to him, to bring Jacob again to him, and that Israel
be not swept away—and I shall be honoured in the eyes of the
Lord, and my God shall be my— 
 6 And he said, It is too light a thing that thou shouldest be my
servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved
of Israel; and I will give thee for a light of the nations,
that my salvation may be to the end of the earth. 
 7 Thus saith the Lord, the redeemer of Israel, and his Holy
One, to the despised of soul, to the abhorred of a nation, to a
servant of rulers: Kings shall see and arise; princes, and they
shall bow themselves; for the sake of the LORD, that is faithful;
the Holy One of Israel, and he hath chosen thee. 
 8 Thus saith the Lord, In a time of favour have I answered
thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee; and I will
preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to
raise up the land, to allot the desolate allotments, 
 9 Saying tothe captives, Go forth; to them that are in darkness,
Show yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and on all
bare heights is their feeding place. 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 And said unto me, Thou art my bondman, Israel, and in
thee will I, be glorified. 
 4 And I said, Vainly have I laboured, in vain and for nought
have I given my strength; therefore my judgment is from the,
Lord, and my toil before my. God. 
 5 And now thus saith the Lord, that formed me from the
womb his bondslave, to gather together Jacob and Israel unto
him, I will be gathered, and will be glorified before the Lord, and
my God shall be my strength. 
 6 And he said to me, It is a great, thing for thee, that thou
mayest be called my servant, that thou mayest set up the tribes
of Jacob, and turn again the dispersion of Israel; behold. I have
set thee for a light of nations, that thou mayest be for salvation
unto the end of the earth. 
 7 Thus saith the Lord thy deliverer, the God of Israel,
Sanctify him that lightly esteemeth his soul, him that is held
abominable by the nations, the slaves of the rulers; kings shall
see him, and rulers shall rise up and worship him for the
Lord's sake: for faithful is the Holy One of Israel, and I chose
thee. 
 8 Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time I heard thee,
and in a day of salvation I helped thee, and gave thee for a
covenant of nations, to establish the earth, and to cause to
inherit desolate heritages, 
 9 Saying to them that are in bonds, Go forth, and (bidding)
them that are in darkness be revealed. And in all the ways they
shall feed, and in all paths is their pasture. 
 
 
 
 

 
 10 They shall not hunger nor thirst; and the burning sand
and sun shall not smite them; for he that hath mercy on them
shall lead them, and by springs of water shall he guide them. 
 11 And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways
shall be exalted. 
 12 Behold, these shall come from afar; and behold, these
from the north and from the sea; and these from the land of
Sinim. 
 13 Sing, O heavens, and rejoice, O earth; and break forth into,
singing, ye mountains; for the Lord hath comforted his people,
and will have mercy upon his afflicted. 
 14 And Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and the Lord
hath forgotten me. 
 15 Will a woman forget her suckling, not to have compassion
on the son of her womb? yea, these may forget, and I will not
forget thee. 
 16 Behold, upon both palms have I engraved thee; thy walls
are continually before me. 
 17 Thy sons make haste; thy destroyers and they that made
thee waste shall go forth of thee. 
 18 Lift up thine eyes round about, and see; they all are
gathered together, they come to thee. As I live, saith the Lord,
thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all as with an ornament,
and gird them on (thee) like a bride. 
 19 For (as for) thy ruins and thy waste places, and the land of
thy destruction, surely now shalt thou be too strait for the
inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away. 
 29 The sons of thy bereavement shall yet say in thine ears,
The place is too strait for me: give place to me, and I will
dwell. 
 
 
 
 

 
 10 They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall burning heat
nor sun smite them; but he that hath mercy on them shall comfort
them, and lead them through springs of waters: 
 11 And I will turn every mountain into a way, and every path
into a pasture for them. 
 12 Behold, these come from far, these from the north, and
these from the sea, and others from the land of the Persians. 
 13 Rejoice, ye heavens, and let the earth exult: let the
mountains break out in joy, because God hath had mercy on his
people, and hath comforted the humble among his people. 
 14 But Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me; and, The Lord
hath forgotten me. 
 15 Will a mother forget her little child, not to have mercy on
the offspring of her womb? but even if a woman should forget
this, yet will I not forget thee, saith the Lord. 
 16 Behold, I have painted thy walls upon my hands, and thou
art alway before me. 
 17 And sdon shalt thou be built by them, by whom thou
wast destroyed, and they that laid thee desolate shall come forth
from thee. 
 18 Lift up thine eyes around, and look on (them) all; behold,
they were gathered together, and came to thee; as I live, saith
the Lord, thou shalt clothe thee with them all, and shalt put them
on thee as a bride's adornment. 
 19 For thy desolate, and destroyed, and fallen places, shall.
now be narrow by reason of thine inhabitants; and they that
swallowed thee up shall be far removed from thee. 
 20 For thy sons, whom thou hast lost, shall say in thine ears,
The place is (too) narrow for me: make a place for me, that
I may dwell in it. 
 
 
 

 
 21 And thou shalt say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me
these, and I was bereaved and barren, an exile, and outcast? and
who hath nourished up these? Behold, I was left alone; these,
where were they? 
 22 Thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, I will lift up my hand
toward the nations, and set up my standard to the peoples; and
they shall bring thy sons in the bosom, and thy daughters shall
be carried on the shoulder, 
 23 And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their princesses
thy nursing mothers: they shall bow themselves to thee face to
the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know
that I am the Lord, on whom they that wait shall not be
ashamed. 
 24 Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the captive of
the righteous delivered? 
 25 For thus saith the Lord, Even the captives of the mighty
shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be
delivered, and I will contend with him that contendeth with
thee, and I will save thy children. 
 26 And I will make them that oppress thee to eat their own
ﬂesh, and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with
new wine; and all ﬂesh shall know that I the Lord am thy
saviour and thy redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. 
 L. 1 Thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your mother's
divorcement, wherewith I have put her away? Or which of my
creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your
iniquities were ye sold, and for your rebellions was your mother
put away. 
 
 

 
 21 And thou shalt say in thine heart, Who begat me these?
Yea, I am childless and a widow, but who hath brought up these
for me? I have been left alone, but where had I these? 
 22 Thus saith the Lord, Behold, Iraise up towards the nations
my hand, and to the isles will I lift up my signal, and they shall
bring thy sons in their bosom, and shall lift thy daughters upon
thy shoulders, 
 23 And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and the princesses
thy nurses; they shall worship before thee on the face of the
earth, and shall lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt learn
that I am the Lord, and thou shalt not be ashamed. 
 24 Shall one take spoils from a giant? and if one take a captive
unlawfully, shall he be saved? 
 25 Thus saith the Lord, If one take a giant captive, he
shall take spoils, and taking them from a mighty man he shall
be saved; and I will judge thy cause, and I will deliver
thy sons: 
 26 And they that afflict thee shall eat their own ﬂesh, and
shall drink their own blood as new wine, and shall be drunken;
and all ﬂesh shall perceive that I am he that hath delivered thee,
and that layeth hold upon the strength of Jacob. 
 L. 1 Thus saith the Lord, Of what kind is the bill of your
mother's divorcement, wherewith I sent her away? or to what
debtor have I sold you? Behold, for your sins were ye sold,
and for your transgressions sent I your mother away. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 Why came I, and there was no man? Whycalled I, and.
there was none that answered? Is my hand utterly too shortened
to redeem? and is there no power in me to deliver? Behold, at
my rebuke I will dry up the sea, I will make rivers a wilderness;
their ﬁsh stink for want of water, and die with thirst. 
 3 I will clothe the heavens in blackness, and make sackcloth
their covering. 
 4 The Lord GOD hath given me the tongue of disciples, that I
should know how to sustain the weary with a word ; he wakeneth
every morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as disciples. 
 5 The Lord GOD hath opened me an ear, and I resisted not,.I
drew not back. 
 6 I gave my back to smiters, and my cheeks to them that
plucked 96 the hair; I hid not my face from ignominies and
spitting. θ . 
 7 And the Lord GOD will help ‘me; therefore I am not
confounded ; therefore have I set my face like a ﬂint, and I know
that I shall not be ashamed. 
 8 Near is he that justiﬁeth me: who will contend with me?
let us stand forth together ; who is the master of my judgment?
let him come near to me. 
 9 Behold, the Lord GOD will help me; who is he that shall
condemn me? 10, they all shall wear out like a garment; the
moth shall eat them. 
 10 Who is among you that feareth the LORD, that hearkeneth‘
to the voice of his servant? He that walketh in darkness, and
hath no light? let him trust in the name of the Loan, and lean
ἶ upon his God. 
 
 

 
 2 Why was it that I came, and there was no man? I called,
and he listened not? Is not my hand strong to deliver? or have
I not strength to rescue? behold, by my threat I will make the
sea a desolation, and make rivers desolate, and their ﬁshes shall
be dried up because there is no water, and shall die for thirst. 
 3 And I will clothe the heaven with darkness, and will make
his shroud as sackcloth. 
 4 The Lord giveth me a tongue of instruction, to perceive
in season when I must speak a word; he gave me in the morning,
he added unto me an ear to hear, 
 5 And the instruction of the Lord openeth mine ears, and
I am not disobedient, nor gainsay (it). 
 6 I have given my back for scourges, and my cheeks for
blows, and my face I turned not away from the shame of
spittings, 
 7 And the Lord became my helper; therefore I turned not
back; but I set my face as a solid rock, and I perceived that
I should not be ashamed. 
 8 For he draweth near that justified me: who is he that
contendeth with me; let him stand up against me together; yea,
who is he that contendeth with me? let him draw near to me. 
 9 Behold, the Lord helpeth me: who shall harm me? behold,
all ye. shall wax old ’a garment, and as it were a moth shall
eat you up. 
 10 Who among you is he that feareth the Lord? let him listen
to the voice of his servant: ye that walk in darkness, they have
no light, trust ye in the name of the Lord, and stay yourselves
upon God. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 Behold, all ye that kindle a ﬁre, that gird yourselves with
ﬁrebrands; walk amid the light of your ﬁre, and amid the brands
that ye have kindled. From my hand is this for you; ye shall
lie down in pain. 
 LI. 1 Hearken to me, ye that pursue righteousness, ye that
seek the Lord: look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to
the hole of the pit whence ye are digged. 
 2 Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare
you; for I called him, being one, and blessed him, and
increased him. 
 3 For the Lord hath comforted Zion; he hath comforted all
her waste places; and he hath made her wilderness like Eden,
and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness
shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of song. 
 4 Listen unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my
nation; for a law shall go forth from me, and I will settle my
judgment for a light of the peoples. 
 5 My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and
mine arms shall, judge the peoples; the isles shall wait for me,
and on mine arm shall they trust. 
 6 Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth
beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the
earth shall wear out like a garment, and they that dwell therein
shall die as in like manner; but my salvation shall be for ever,
and my righteousness shall not be dismayed. 
 7 Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, ’a people in
whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of (weak) men,
and be ye not dismayed at their revilings. 
 
 
 

 
 11 Behold, all ye kindle a ﬁre, and strengthen a ﬂame; walk
by the light of your ﬁre, and in the ﬂame wherewith ye kindled
it; because of me came this upon you, ye shall lie down in pain. 
 LI. 1 Hearken to me, ye that pursue that is righteous, and
seek the Lord: look unto the solid rock which ye did hew, and
unto the hole of the pit which ye digged. 
 2 Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare
you; for he was one, and I called him, and blessed him, and
loved him, and multiplied him. 
 3 And thee will I now comfort, Zion, and I did comfort all her
waste places; <and I will make her waste places> as
and the western regions like a garden of the Lord; joy and
exultation shall they ﬁnd therein, confession and the voice of
praise. 
 4 Hearken to me, hearken, my people; and ye kings, give
ear unto me ; for a law shall go forth from me, and my judgment
for a light of the nations. 
 5 My righteousness draweth quickly near; and my salvation
also shall go forth, and in my arm shall the nations hope; the
isles shall wait for me, and in my arm shall they hope. 
 6 Lift up your eyes to the heaven, and look upon the earth
beneath 3 for the heaven is massed as smoke, and the earth shall
wax old like a cloke, and they that dwell on the earth shall die
like as those (things); but my salvation, shall be for everlasting,
and my righteousness shall not fail. 
 7 Hearken unto me, ye that know judgment, my people who
have the law in your hearts; fear ye not the reproach of men,
and be not overcome by their despising. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 For the moth shall eat them like a garment, and the worm
shall eat them like wool; but my righteousness shall be for ever,
and my salvation from generation to generation. 
 9 Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake
as in the ancient days, the generations of old. Art thou not it
that hewed Rahab in pieces, that pierced the dragon? 
 10 Art thou not it that dried up the sea, the waters of the
great deep; that made the depths of the sea a way for the redeemed
to pass over? 
 11 And the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to
Zion with song, and everlasting joy upon their head; they shall
attain gladness and joy, and sorrow and sighing are ﬂed away. 
 12 I, I, (am) he that Comforteth you; who artthou, that thou
fearest (weak) man that shall die, and the son of man that shall
be made as grass; 
 13 And hast forgotten the Lord thy maker, that stretched out
the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth? and hast
trembled continually all the day before the fury of the oppressor,
as he made ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the
oppressor ? 
 14 He that is bowed down hasteneth to be loosed, and shall
not die in the pit, nor shall his bread fail. 
 15 And Ipam the Lord thy God, that stirreth up the sea, and
its waves roared; the Lord of Hosts is his name. 
 16 put my words in thy mouth, and with the shadow
of my hand have. I covered thee, to plant the heavens, and to
lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art
my people. 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 For as a cloke shall it be eaten up by time, and as wool
shall it be eaten up by a moth; but my righteousness shall be for
ever, and my salvation for generations of generations. 
 9 Awake, awake, Jerusalem, and put on the strength of thine
arm; awake as in the beginning of a day, as a generation of
eternity. Art not thou 
 10 She that maketh desolate the sea, the water, the abundance
of the deep? that made the depths of the sea a passage way
for the delivered, 
 11 and them that were redeemed? For by the Lord's doing
shall they return, and come to Zion with joy, and everlasting
exultation; for upon their head is exultation and praise, and joy
shall take hold of them; grief is fallen away, and pain, and
sighings. 
 12 I am, I am he that comforteth thee; learn of- whom thou
wast ware, and didst fear before a mortal man, and before a son
of man; who were dried up like grass. 
 13 And thou forgottest God that made thee, that made the
heaven, and laid the foundations of the earth; and didst fear
continually all the days the face of the wrath of him that was
afflicting thee, for (it was) as (though) he were minded to remove
thee; and now, where is the wrath of him that did afflict thee? 
 14 For in thy being saved he shall not stand (still), nor linger. 
 15 For I am thy God, which disturbeth the sea, and maketh
her waves to sound; the Lord of Hosts is my name. 
 16 I will put my words in thy mouth, and under my right
hand will I shelter thee; wherewith I set up the heaven, and
laid the foundation of the earth; and he shall say to Zion, Thou
art my people. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 17 Wake, wake thee up, arise, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk
at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken
the bowl of the cup of bewilderment, thou hast drained it out. 
 18 There is no guide for her among all the sons that she hath
brought forth, neither is there any, that taketh hold of her hand
of all the sons that she bought up. 
 19 These two things are come upon thee: who will mourn
with thee? wasting and destruction, and the famine and the
sword: how shall I comfort thee? 
 20 Thy sons have fainted: they lie at the head of all the
streets, like an antelope in a net; they that are ﬁlled with the
fury of the LORD, the rebuke of thy God. 
 21 Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, and
not with wine: 
 22 Thus saith thy Lord, the Lord, and thy God, that pleadeth
the cause of his people, Behold, I take out of thine hand the
cup of bewilderment, the bowl of the cup of my fury; thou shalt
no more drink it again: 
 23 And I will putit into the hand of thy tormentors; which
said to thy soul, Bow down, and we will pass over; and thou
didst set thy back as the earth, and as the street, to them that
passed over. 
 LII. I Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion! Put
on thy garments of beauty, O Jerusalem, holy city: for there
shall no more come into thee again the uncircumcised and the
unclean. 
 
 

 
 17 Awake, awake, stand up, Jerusalem, that hast drunk the
cup of wrath from the hand of the Lord; for thou didst drink,
and didst empty out the cup of falling, the goblet of (his) 
 18 And there was none that comforted thee from among all
thy children that thou broughtest forth; and there was none.
that took hold of thy hand from among all thy sons whom
thou didst raise up. 
 19 These two things are against thee; who shall grieve with
thee? ruin and destruction, famine and sword: who shall
comfort thee? 
 20 Thy sons are they that are helpless, that lie down at the
head of every passage way like sodden herbs; that are full
of the wrath of the Lord, that are undone through the Lord God. 
 21 Therefore hear, thou that art humbled, and drunken, not
with wine: 
 22 Thus saith the Lord, the God that judgeth his people,
Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of falling, the
goblet of (my) wrath, and thou shalt no more drink it again: 
 23 And I will put it ’the hands of them that did thee
wrong, and them that humbled thee; which said to thy soul
Bow down, that we may pass by; and thou laidest thy back even
with the ground, without, for them that went by. 
 LII. 1 Awake, awake, Zion; put on thy strength, Zion, and
put on ’glory, Jerusalem, holy city; no longer shall there pass
through thee again (one) uncircumcised and unclean. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 Shake thyself from the dust: arise, sit, Jerusalem! the
bands of thy neck are loosed, O Captive daughter of Zion‘. ’ 
 3 For thus saith the LORD, .Ye were sold for nought; and not
with silver shall ye be redeemed. 
 4 For thus saith the Lord GOD, My people went down into
Egypt at the ﬁrst to sojourn there; and Asshur oppressed them
without cause. 
 5 And now, what have I here, saith the LORD, that my peopl
is taken away for nought? they that rule over him howl, saith the
LORD ; and my name continually all the day is despised. 
 6 I‘herefore my people shall know my name; therefore (they
shall know) in that day that I am he that doth speak: Here
am L 
 7 How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
bringeth glad tidings, that causeth peace to be heard ; that
bringeth glad tidings of good, that causeth salvation to be heard;
that saith unto Zion, Thy God doth reign 
 8 The voice of thy watchmen! they liﬂ: up the voice, they -
sing together; for they shall see eye to eye, at the LoitD’s
return to Zion. · 
 9 Break forth, sing together, y’e wastes of .Jerusalem: for the
LORD hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem. 
 10 The LORD hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of. ’
all the nations; and all the ends of the earth have seen the
salvation of our God. 
 11 Depart ye, depart ye, go ye. out from thence, touch not.
what is unclean; goye out of the midst of her; purify your-
- selves, ye that bear the vessels of the LORD. 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 Shake off the dust, and arise; sit down, O Jerusalem, put
off the bond from thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion. 
 3 For thus saith the Lord, Ye were sold for nought, and not
with money shall ye be ransomed. 
 4 Thus saith the Lord, My people went down aforetime
into Egypt to sojourn there, and by force were they led to
the Assyrians. 
 5 And now, why are ye here? Thus saith the Lord, Because
my people were seized for nought, ye marvel and wail. Thus
saith the Lord, Because of you my name is continually blasphemed
among the nations. 
 6 Therefore my people shall learn my name in that day, that
I am verily he that speaketh: I am here, 
 7 Like beauty upon the mountains, like the feet of one
bringing glad tidings of news of peace, like one that bringeth
glad tidings of good things; for I will make thy salvation heard,
saying to Zion, God shall reign over thee. 
 8 For the voice of them that watch over thee is upraised, and
with their voice shall they rejoice together: for eyes shall look -
upon eyes, when the Lord hath mercy upon Zion. 
 9 Let the waste places of jerusalem break forth together in
joy, for the Lord hath mercy upon her, and bath delivered
Jerusalem. 
 10 And the Lord will make bare his holy arm before all the
nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation
that cometh from God. 
 11 Depart, depart ye, go forth from thence, and touch not what
is unclean; go forth from the midst of her, separate yourselves,
ye that bear the vessels of the Lord. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 12 For ye shall not go out in haste, nor go in ﬂight: for the
Lord goeth before you, and the God of Israel is your rereward. 
 13 Behold, my servant shall deal wisely, he shall be high, and
lifted up, and exalted exceedingly. 
 14 Like as many were appalled at thee; his sightliness was
so marred from (that of) a man, and his form from (that of)
the sons of men: ’ 
 15 So shall he sprinkle many nations; kingsshall shut their
mouths because of him; for that which was not recounted to
them shall they see, and that which they heard not shall they
discern. 
 LIII. 1 Who hath believed our message? and the arm of
the Lord, to whom was it revealed? 
 2 And he grew up before him as a sapling, and as a root
out of a dry ground: he had no form nor majesty; and we saw
him, and there was no sightliness, that we should desire him. 
 3 Despised and avoided of men; a man of pains, and one
that knew sickness; and as one from whom faces are hid despised,
and we esteemed him not. 
 4 Surely he bore- our sicknesses; and our pains, he supported
them; and we, (on our part,) did esteem him stricken, smitten
of God, and afflicted. 
 5 And he was pierced for our rebellions, bruised for our
iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and
in his stripes was there healing for us. 
 6 All we like sheep did go astray; we turned every one to
his own way; and the lord made to fall upon him the iniquity
of us all. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 12 For not with confusion shall ye go forth, nor in ﬂight shall
ye go: for the Lord will go before in front of you, and the Lord,
the God of Israel, is he that gathereth you together. 
 13 Behold, my servant shall understand, and shall be exalted,
and be glorified exceedingly. 
 14 Like as many shall be amazed at thee,—so shall thy
be despised from among men, and thy glory from among men. 
 15 So shall many nations marvel at him, and kings shall shut
their mouth; for (they) to whom it was not declared shall see
concerninglhim, and they who have not heard shall understand. 
 LIII. 1 Lord, who did believe our report? and the arm of
the Lord, to whom was it revealed ? 
 2 We declared him as a child before him, as (is) a root in
a thirsty land; he hath no form nor glory. And we saw him,
and he had no form nor comeliness, 
 3 But his form was unhonoured, and failing among all men;
a man under a stroke, and one that knew how to bear sickness;
for his face is turned away, he was dishonoured and not
esteemed. 
 4 This is he that beareth our sins, and sorroweth for us;
and we esteemed him to be in trouble, and under a stroke, and
calamity. 
 5 But he was wounded for our transgressions, and was sick
because of our sins; the discipline of our peace was upon him;
with his stripe we were healed. 
 6 All we like sheep-did go astray, each strayed by his own
way; and the Lord gave him over to our sins. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 7 He was oppressed, and he humbled himself, and opened
not his mouth; as a lamb (that) is led to the slaughter, and
as a sheep (that) is dumb before her shearers; and he opened
not his mouth. 
 8 From restraint and from judgment he was taken away;
and as for his generation, who considereth, that he was cut off
out of the land of the living? for the rebellion of my people
was he stricken. 
 9 And one appointed his grave with wicked men, and with
a rich man in his death; because he had done no violence, and
there was no deceit in his mouth. 
 10 And the LORD was pleased to bruise him; he laid sickness
on him; if his soul should make a guilt-offering, he should see
a seed, he should prolong days, and the pleasure of the Lord
should prosper in his hand. 
 11 Out of the travail of his. soul he shall see, he shall be
satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant make
many righteous; for he will bear their iniquities. 
 12 Therefore will I give him part among the many, and he
shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he poured out
his soul unto death; and he was numbered with the rebellious;
and himself bare the sin of many, and made intercession for
the rebellious. 
 LIV. 1 Sing, Ο barren, that didst not bear; break forth
into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail; for more
are the children of the desolate than the children of the married
wife, saith the Lord. 
 
 
 
 

 
 7 And be, for that he hath been evil ’eated, openeth not
his mouth; he was led as a sheep to slaughter, and as a lamb
dumb before the shearer, so he openeth not his mouth. 
 8 In humiliation his judgment was taken away; who
shall describe ’ generation? for his life is removed from
the earth; from the transgressions of my people was he led to
death. 
 9 And I give the wicked instead of his burial, and the
rich instead of his death; because he committed no transgression,
neither was guile found in his mouth. 
 10 And the Lord desireth cleanse him from his plague:
if ye offer for sin, your soul shall see a long lived seed: and
the Lord desireth to take (him) away .from the trouble of
his soul, 
 11 To show to him alight, and to form him with understanding
to justify a just one that serveth many aright, and
their sins shall he himself bear. 
 12 Therefore he shall make many to inherit, and the spoils
of the mighty shall he divide; because his soul was given over
unto death; and he was reckoned among the transgressors; and
himself bare the sins of many, and was given over because of
their sins. 
 LIV. 1 Rejoice, barren one that bearest not, break forth
and cry aloud, thou that travailest not; for many are the
of the desolate, rather than of her that hath her husband; for
the Lord hath spolten it. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 Widen the place of. thy tent, and let them stretch forth the
curtains of thy habitation; withhold not; lengthen thy cords,
and strengthen thy stakes: 
 3 For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the
left; ’thy seed shall possess nations, and make desolate.
nations to be inhabited. 
 4 Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed; and be not confounded,
for thou shalt not blush; for thou shalt forget the
shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of
thy widowhood any more. 
 5 For thy husband is thy Maker; the LORD of Hosts is his
name; and thy Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel: the God
of the whole earth shall he be called. 
 6 For the LORD hath called thee as a wife forsaken and
grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when she is rejected, saith
ᾖ thy God. 
 7 For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great
- mercies I gather thee. 
 8 In a gush of wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment;
and with everlasting lovingkindness will I have mercy on thee;
saith the LORD thy Redeemer. 
 9 For this is the waters of Noah unto me; as I have sworn
i that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth;
so have I sworn that I will not be wrbth with thee, nor re?
buke thee 
 10 For the mountains shall remove, and the hills totter; yet
my lovingkindness shall not remove from thee, nor my covenant
of peace totter, saith he that hath mercy on thee, the Lord. 
 
 
 

 
 2 Widen the place of thy tent, and of thy curtains; make
fast, spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy
stakes : 
 3 Spread it out yet to the right hand and to the left; and
thy seed shall inherit nations, and thou shalt people cities that
have been desolate. 
 4 Fear not, because thou wast put to shame; and turn not
back, because thou wast reproached; for thou shalt forget thy
perpetual shame, and the reproach of thy widowhood shalt thou
not remember. 
 5 For thy Maker is the Lord, the Lord of Hosts is his name;
- and he that delivereth thee is the very God of Israel, he shall
be called (so) in all the earth. 
 6 Not as a woman forsaken <and faint of heart>
Lord called thee, nor as a woman hated from her youth, saith
thy God. 
 7 For a little while I forsook thee, and with great mercy will
I have mercy on thee. 
 8 In a little wrath I turned my face away from thee, and in
everlasting mercy have I had mercy ’on thee: saith the Lord
thy deliverer. 
 9 From the water that was in the time of Noah this is mine,
as I sware to him at that time, that I would no more be wroth
with the earth because of thee, nor for a threatening of thee
remove the mountains: 
 10 Nor shall thy hills be shaken from their place: so neither
shall the mercy that cometh from me upon thee fail, nor the
covenant of thy peace be removed ; for he said, TheLord is
gracious to thee. 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 Ο thou afficted, tossed with tempest, not comforted ;
behold I lay thy stones in antimony, and thy foundations with
sapphires. 
 12 And I will make thy battlements rubies, and thy gates. to
be ﬁery stones, and all thy border stones of pleasure. 
 13 And all thy sons shall be disciples of the LORD, andgreat
shallbe the peace of thy sons. 
 14 In righteousness shalt thou be established; be thou far
from oppression, for thou shalt not fear, and from destruction,
for it shall not come near thee. 
 15 Behold, they surely gather together; it is not of me; who
gathereth against thee? he shall fall because of thee. 
 16 Behold, I have created the craftsman, that bloweth on the
ﬁre of coals, and that bringeth forth a weapon for its work; and
Ι have created the waster to destroy. 
 17 No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and
every tongue (that) shall rise up against thee in judgment thou
shalt convict. This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD,
and their righteousness from me, saith the Lord. 
 LV. I Ah, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters,
and he that hath no silver; come ye, buy and eat: and come, buy
wine and milk, for no silver and for no price. 
 2 Wherefore do ye weigh silver for no bread, and your earnings
for that which is not to satisfy? hearken, (only) hearken
unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight
itself in fatness. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 Humbled and unstable, thou wast not comforted; behold,
I prepare for thee carbuncle for thy stone, and sapphire for
thy foundations. 
 12 And I will make thy battlements of jasper, and thy gates
of crystal stones, and thy circuit of chosen stones. 
 13 And (I will make) all thy sons instructed of the Lord, and
thy children (to be) in great peace. 
 14 (And in righteousness shalt thou be builded; refrain from
wrong, and thou shalt not be afraid, and trembling shall not
come nigh thee 
 15 Behold, strangers shall approach unto thee through me,
and they shall dwell by thee, and ﬂee for refuge to thee. 
 16 Behold, I create thee, not as doth a smith that bloweth
the coals, and bringeth forth an instrument for-a work: but I have I
created thee not for destruction, to waste thee. 
 17 Every instrument is corruptible, but against thee I will not
approve it; and every voice that shall stand up against thee for
judgment, all them shalt thou vanquish, and they that are subject
’to thee shall be therein. There is an inheritance for them that
attend on the Lord, and ye shall be righteous in my sight, saith
the Lord. 
 LV. I Ye that thirst, come to (the) water, and all ye that
have no money, come and buy, and drink, without money and
price, of the wine, and the fat. 
 2 Wherefore do ye value (them) for money, and your labour,
not for satisfying? and ye shall eat good things, and your soul
shall delight itself in good things. 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul
shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you;
the faithful lovingkindnesses of David. 
 4 Behold, I have given him for a witness of peoples, a chief
and commander of peoples. 
 5 Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and
a nationthat knoweth not thee shall run unto thee; for the sake
of the LORD thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel; for he
hath gloriﬁed thee. 
 6 Seek ye the LORD while he may be found, call ye upon him
while he is near. 
 7 Let the wicked forsake his way, and the man of iniquity his
thoughts; and let him return unto the LORD, and he will have
mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon. 
 8 For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your
ways my ways, saith the LORD. 
 9 “For (as) the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my
ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your
thoughts. 
 10 For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven,
and returneth not thither, unless it have watered the earth, and
made it bringtforth and sprout, and given seed to the sower,
and bread to the eater: 
 11 So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth;
it shall not return unto me void, unless it have accomplished that
which I please, and made to prosper thatfor which I sent it. 
 12 For ye shall go forth with joy, and be led in peace; the
mountains and the hills shall break forth before you [into singing,
and all the trees of the ﬁeld shall clap the hand. 
 
 
 

 
 3 Attend with your ears, and follow ye my paths; hearken
to me, and your soul shall live amid good things; and I will
make with you an everlasting covenant, the holy things of David
that are sure. 
 4 Behold, I have given him for a testimony among nations,
- a ruler and commander over nations. 
 5 Nations which knew not thee shall call upon thee; and
peoples which understand not thee shall ﬂee unto thee, for thy
’s sake, the Holy One of Israel; for he glorifieth thee. 
 6 Seek ye God, and as ye ﬁnd him, call upon him ; and when
soever he draweth near unto thee, 
 7 Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the man that transgresseth
his counsels; and let him return unto the Lord, and
he will have mercy upon him; for far away will he dismiss
your sins. 
 8 For my counsels are not as your counsels, nor are my ways
as your ways, saith the Lord. 
 9 But, as the heaven is far from the earth, so is my way far
- from your ways, and your thoughts from my thought. 
 10 For as rain cometh down, or snow from heaven, and will
not return, until it have watered the earth, and she, bring forth
and blossom, and shall give seed to the sower, and bread for
food: 
 11 So shall be my word, whatsoever goeth forth from my
mouth; it shall not return until all that I willed be fulfilled
and I prosper thy ways and my commandments. 
 12 For ye shall go forth in joy, and in delight shall ye be
taught; for the mountains and the hills shall leap forth, welcoming
’ you in delight, and all the trees of the ﬁeld shall clash their
branches, 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 13 Instead of the thorn shall come up the ﬁr tree, and
instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree; and it shall
be to the LORD for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall
not be cut off. 
 LVI. 1 Thus saith the LORD, Keep ye judgment, and. do
righteousness 3 for my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness
to be revealed. 
 2 Happy is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that
boldeth fast by it; that keepeth the sabbath, not to profane it,
and keepeth his hand, not to do any evil. 
 3 And let not the alien, that hath joined himself to the LORD,
speak, saying, The LORD will surely separate me from his people;
and let not the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree. 
 4 For thus saith the LORD unto the eunuchs that keep my
sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and hold fast
by my covenant: 
 5 I Will even give unto them in my house and within my walls
a memorial and a name better than sons and daughters; I will
give him an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off. 
 6 And the aliens, that have joined themselves to the LORD,
to minister unto him, and to love the name of the LORD, to be
his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath, not to profane it,
and boldeth fast by my covenant : 
 7 Them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them
joyful in my house of prayer; their burnt offerings and their
sacrifices (shall be) acceptable upon mine altar; for mine house
’ shall be called a house of prayer for all the peoples. 
 8 Saith the Lord GOD which gathereth the outcasts of Israel,
Yet I gather (more) unto him, to his gathered ones. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 13 And instead of the broom shall come up the cypress, and
instead of the fleabane shall come up a myrtle-tree; and the
Lord shall be for a name and for an everlasting sign, and shall
not fail. 
 LVI. Thus saith the Lord, Guard ye judgment, do righteousness;
for my salvation is come near to appear, and my mercy
to be revealed. 
 2 Happy is ’the man that doeth this, and the mortal that
holdeth fast thereto, and guardeth the sabbaths, not to pollute
them, and watcheth his hands, to do no wrong. 
 3 Let not the stranger, that cleaveth to the Lord, say, Then
will the Lord separate me from his people; and let not the
eunuch say, I am a dry tree. 
 4 Thus saith the Loid to all the eunuchs that keep my
sabbaths, and choose out what I desire, and hold fast to my
covenant: 
 5 I will give to them in my house and within my wall
’ a notable place; (it is) better than sons and daughters; an everlasting
name will I give to them, and it shall not fail; 
 6 And to all the strangers that cleave to the Lord, to serve
him, and to love the name of the, Lord, that they may be to
him for bondmen and for bondwomen; and ’for) all them
that. keep my sabbaths, not to pollute them, and hold fast to
my covenant, 
 7 Ι will bring them in to my holy mountain, and make them
joyful in the house of my prayer; their whole burnt offerings
and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar. For mine
house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations, 
 8 Saith the Lord that gathereth together the dispersed of Israel,
for I will gather unto him a gathering. 
 
 
 

 
 9 All ye beasts of the ﬁeld, come to devour; all beasts of
the forest. 
 10 His watchmen are blind, they know not, all of them; they
are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; dreaming, lying down,
loving to slumber. 
 11 And the dogs are strong of soul, they know not satiety;
and they, the shepherds, know not how to discern; they are all
turned to their own. way, every one to his gain, from the
furthest end of it. 
 12 Come ye, I will fetch wine, and we will ﬁll ourselves with
strong drink; and to-morrow shall be as this day, very exceeding
great. 
 LVII. 1 The. righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to
heart; and men of lovingkindness are taken away, none considering
that the righteous is taken away from the face of the
evil. 
 2 He entereth into peace; they rest on their beds, whoso
walketh straight forward. 
 3 And ye, draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, seed of
an adulterer and a whore. 
 4 At whom do ye make sport? at whom widen ye the mouth,
and lengthen the tongue? Are ye not children of rebellion,
a seed of falsehood? 
 5 Inflaming yourselves among the terebinths; under every
green tree; slaying the children in the torrent-valleys under the
clefts of the rocks. 
 6 Among the smooth (stones) of the torrent-valley is thy
portion; they, they are thy lot; even to them hast thou poured
out a drink-offering, thou hast offered a meat-offering. Shall
I relent for these things? 
 7 Upon a mountain exalted and lifted up hast thou set thy
bed; even there hast thou gone up to offer sacrifice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 9 All ye wild beasts of the ﬁeld, come hither and eat, all ye
wild beasts of the forest. 
 10 See ye, that all are utterly blinded, they have not learnt
’ to have understanding; dumb dogs all, they will not be able to
bark; dreaming on their couch, prone to slumber. 
 11 And the dogs are insatiate of heart, and ’know not satisfy-
ing; and they are wicked, knowing no wisdom; all follow their
own ways, each after the same manner. 
 12 * * * * * * * 
 LVII. I See ye, how the righteous hath perished, and no
man accepts it in his heart, and righteous men are taken away,
and no man considereth; for from the face of wrong hath the
righteous been taken away, 
 2. His burial shall be in peace, he is removed out of the
midst; 
 3 But draw ye near hither, sons that are transgressors, ye
seed of adulterers and a whore. 
 4 Wherein do ye take delight? and against whom open ye
your mouth? and against whom do ye drop out your tongue?
are ye not children of perdition, a transgressing seed? 
 5 Ye, that call upon your idols under leafy trees, that slay
your children in the valleys amid ’rocksl 
 6 That is your portion, this is your lot: and for those thou
didst pour out drink-offerings, and to those thou didst bring
sacrifices: shall I not then be wroth for this? 
 7 Upon a mountain high and lofty, there was thy couch, and
there broughtest thou up sacrifices 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 And behind the door and the post hast thou set thy
memorial; for away from me hast thou uncovered, and gone up,
hast enlarged thy bed, and gotten thee a covenant from them;
thou hast loved their bed, hast looked on a hand. 
 9 And thou hast travelled to the king with oil, and hast
multiplied thy perfumes, and hast sent thine envoys far off, and
hast brought (thyself )1 down, even to hell. 
 10 Thou hast wearied thyself with the abundance of thy
travel; thou saidst not, It is hopeless; thou hast found revival
of thy strength; therefore thou wast not faint. 
 11 And of whom hast thou been afraid, and feared, that thou
shouldest lie, and hast not remembered me, hast not laid it to
thine heart? Have I not held my peace, and that from of old,
and thou fearest not me? 
 12 I will declare thy righteousness; and thy works, and they
shall not profit thee. 
 13 When thou criest, let thy gatherings deliver thee; and
a wind shall lift them all up, a breath shall take them away;
and he that trusteth in me shall inherit the land, and shall.
possess my holy mountain: 
 14 And (one) saith, Cast up, cast up, clear a. way; take up
the stumbling block out of the way of my people. 
 15 For thus saith he. that is high and lifted up, that dwelleth
for ever, and. holy 15 ms name ; I dwell in the high andholy
place, and with him that is crushed and humble of spirit, to
revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the
crushed ones. 
 16 For I will not contend forever, and not always I be,
wroth; for the spirit would fail from before me, and the souls
which I have made. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 And behind the posts of thy door didst thou set thy
memorials; thou thoughtest, that if thou shouldst revolt from
me, thou wouldst gain advantage; thou lovedst them that lay
with thee, 
 9 And didst multiply thine adultery with them, and madest
many them that were far off from thee, and didst send envoys
- beyond thy borders, and tumedst away, and wert abased even
to hell. 
 10 By thy much journeyings ’thou wert wearied, and saidst
not, I will cease; being strong in that thou didst thus; therefore
thou besoughtest me not. 
 11 Of whom wast thou ware, and fearedst; and didst deceive
me, and rememberedst me not, neither tookest me into thy
thought? and I saw thee, and looked aside, and thou fearedst
not me. 
 12 And I declare. my righteousness, and thy evil deeds; which
shall not profit thee. 
 13 When thou criest out, let them deliver thee in thy affliction
for a wind shall take all these, and a tempest shall hear them
away. But they that hold fast to me shall possess the earth,
ἢ and shall inherit my holy mountain, 
 14 And they shall say, Cleanse the paths before his face; remove
stumbling blocks from the way of my people. 
 15 Thus saith the Lord, the highest among the high, that
inhabiteth eternity, Holy among the holy is his name, the Lord,
the highest, resting among the holy, and giving patience to the
faint hearted, and giving life to them whose hearts are crushed: 
 16 And not for ever will I punish you, nor ’I alway be
angry with you 3 for a spirit shall go forth from me, and I have
made every breath. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 17 For the iniquity of his gain was I wroth, and smote him
I hid myself and was ’wroth, and he wenton perversely in the
way of his heart. 
 18 I have seen his ways, and I will heal him; and I will lead
him, and requite with comfort him and his mourners; 
 19 Creating fruit of the lips, Peace, peace, to the far off and
the near, saith the LORD, and I will heal him. 
 20 And the wicked are like the stirred up sea; for it cannot.
rest, and its waters stir up mire and 
 21 There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked. 
 LVIII. I Cry with the throat, withhold not, raise thy voice
like a trumpet, and tell my people their rebellion, and the house
of Jacob their sins. ’ 
 2 And (yet) they inquire of me day by day, and take pleasure
in the knowledge of my, ways; as a nation that hath done
righteousness, and not forsaken the judgment of its God; they
ask of me the judgments of righteousness; they take pleasure
in drawing near to God. 
 3 Wherefore have we fasted, and thou seest not? afflited our
soul, and thou knowest not? Behold, in the day of your fast
ye ﬁnd pleasure, and exact all your tasks. 
 4 Behold, ye fast for contention and quarrel, and to smite
with the ﬁst of wickedness; ye shall not fast as to-day, to make
your voice to be heard on high. 
 5 Shall such be the fast I will choose? a day of man's afflicting
his soul? is it to bow down his head like a bulrush, and
spread out sackcloth and ashes (as a bed)? Wilt thou call this
a fast, and an acceptable day to the-LORD? 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 17 For sin I troubled him a little while, and I smote him,
and turned my face from him; and he was troubled, and went
gloomily in his ways. 
 18 I have seen his ways, and I healed him, and comforted
him, and gave him true comfort, 
 19 Peace upon peace to them that are far off, and them that
are near; and the Lord said, I will heal them: 
 20 But so the unrighteous shall be tossed as waves, and shall
not be able to rest. 
 21 There is no rejoicing, saith the Lord God, for the wicked. 
 LVIII. I Cry out with strength, and spare not, lift up thy
voice as a trumpet, and declare to thy people their sins, and to
the house of Jacob their transgressions. 
 2 They will seek me day by day, and desire to know my ways:
as a people that hath practised the righteousness of God, and
hath not forsaken the judgment of its God; they ask of me now
righteous judgment, and desire to draw near to God, 
 3 Saying, Why is it that we have fasted, and thou sawest not?
humbled our souls, and thou perceivedst not? for in the days
of your fast ye ﬁnd your desires, and vex all those subject
unto you. 
 4 Ye fast for quarrels and strife, and smite a humble man
with ﬁsts; wherefore fast ye before me as to-day, for your voice
to be heard in clamour? 
 5 This is not the fast that I choose, and a day for a man to
humble his soul; not even if thou bend thy neck like a ring,
and spread sackcloth and ashes under thee, not even so shall
ye call it an acceptable fast. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 6 Is not this the fast that I will choose? to loose the bands
of wickedness, to undo the thongs of the yoke, and to let the
crushed go free, and that ye should break every yoke? 
 7 Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou
bring afflicted outcasts home? when thou seest the naked, that
thou cover him, and hide not thyself from thine own ﬂesh? 
 8 Then shall thy light break forth as the dawn, and thy healing
shall spring up speedily; and thy righteousness shall go before
thee, the glory of the LORD shall be thy rereward. 
 9 Then shalt thou call, and the LORD shall answer; thou
shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am. If thou remove from
the midst of thee the yoke, the pointing of the ﬁnger, and speaking
iniquity: 
 10 And furnish thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted
soul ; then shall thy light arise in the darkness, and thy gloom
be as the noonday: 
 11 And the LORD shall lead thee perpetually, and satisfy thy
soul in dry places, and make strong thy bones: and thou shalt
be like a watered garden, ahd like a spring of water whose
waters fail not. 
 12 And they that are of thee shall build up ruins of old
time: thou shalt raise up the foundations of generation upon
generation; and thou shalt be called Repairer of the breach,
Restorer of paths to dwell in. 
 
 
 

 
 6 Not such a fast as this do I choose, saith the Lord; but
loose every bond of iniquity, unloose the knots of oppressive
compacts, send forth the broken in forgiveness and tear asunder
every unjust writing: 
 7 Break thy bread for one that is hungry, and bring the
homeless poor into thine house; if thou see one naked, clothe
him, and of the kinsmen of thy seed thou shalt not despise
any. 
 8 Then shall thy light break forth early in the morning, and
thy healing shall arise speedily; and thy righteousness shall go
before thee, and the glory of God shall wrap thee round. 
 9 Then shalt thou cry, and God shall hearken to thee; while
thou art yet speaking, he shall say, Behold, here I am. If thou
take away from thee bonds, and stretching forth of hands, and
the word of murmuring, 
 10 And give to a hungry man thy bread from thy soul, and
satisfy the soul that hath been humbled, then shall thy light arise
in the darkness, and thy darkness (shall be) as noonday, 
 11 And thy God shall be <with thee> continually; and thou
shalt be satisfied according as thy soul desireth, and thy bones
shall be enriched, and shall be as a well-watered garden, and as
a spring whose water faileth not; and thy bones shall grow up
as grass, and shall be enriched, and they shall inherit for generations
of generations. 
 12 And thy desolate places of old shall be rebuilt, and thy
foundations shall be everlasting, for generations of generations;
and thou shalt be called, A builder of fences, and thou shalt
make thy paths in the midst to rest. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 13 If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, as to doing
thy pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight,
the holy (day) of the LORD honourable; and honour it, not
doing thine own ways, not ﬁnding thine own pleasure, nor
speaking words: 
 14 Then shalt thou have thy delight in the LORD; and I will
cause thee to ride upon the heights of the earth, and to eat
the heritage of Jacob thy father; for the mouth of the LORD
hath spoken it. 
 LIX. I Behold, the ’S hand is not shortened, that it
cannot save ; neither his ear grown heavy, that it cannot hear: 
 2 But your iniquities have been separating between you and
your God, and your sins have hidden the Face from you, that
he hear not. 
 3 For your hands are defiled with blood, and your ﬁngers
with iniquity; your lips have spoken falsehood, your tongue will
mutter wickedness. 
 4 There is none that sueth in righteousness, and none that
pleadeth in truth; they trust in emptiness, and speak vanity;
they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity. 
 5 They hatch ’s eggs, and weave spider's webs; he that
eateth of their eggs shall die, and that which is crushed, it
hatcheth out into an adder. 
 6 Their webs shall not serve for a garment, neither shall they
cover themselves with their works; their works are works of
iniquity, and the practice of violence is in their hands. 
 7 Their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed innocent
blood; their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and destruction
are in their highways. 
 
 
 
 

 
 13 If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbaths, not to do
thine own desires on the holy day, and thou shalt call the
sabbaths full of pleasure, holy to thy God, thou shalt not lift
thy foot for work, nor speak a word in anger out of thy mouth, 
 14 Then thou shalt have thy trust in the Lord, and he shall
set thee up upon the good things of the earth, and shall feed
thee upon the inheritance of Jacob thy father; for the mouth
of the Lord hath spoken this. 
 LIX. 1 Is not the Lord's hand mighty to save? or hath he
made his ear heavy, that it hear not? 
 2 But your sins separate between you <and your God,;>
because of your sins hath he turned his face away from you,
not to have mercy upon you. 
 3 For your hands are defiled-with blood, and your ﬁngers in
sins; and your lips have spoken transgression, and your tongue
doth meditate wrong-doing. 
 4 No man speaketh righteousness, nor is there any true judgment;
they trust in vanities and speak empty words; for they
have conceived trouble, and bring forth transgression. 
 5 They brake the eggs of asps, and weave the web of a spider;
and he that trieth to eat of their eggs, when he breaketh it he
ﬁndeth wind, and in it is a basilisk. 
 6 Their web shall not be for a garment; nor shall they be
clothed with their works; for their works are works of
transgression. 
 7 And their feet run after wickedness, swift to shed blood,
and their reasonings (are) the reasonings of fools; destruction
and unhappiness is in their ways, 
 
 
 

 
 8 The way of peace they know not, and there is no judgment
in their tracks; they have made them their paths crooked; whosoever
goeth therein knoweth not peace. 
 9 Therefore is judgment far from us, neither doth righteousness
overtake us; we wait for light, and behold darkness; for
brightness,—we walk in 
 10 We grope along the wall like blind men, and we grope as
men without eyes; we have stumbled at noonday as in the dusk;
among the vigorous as the dead. 
 11 We all groan like bears, and moan piteously like doves;
we wait for judgment, and there is none; for salvation, it is
far off from us. 
 12 For our rebellions are multiplied before thee, and our sins
testify against us; for our rebellions are with us, and our
iniquities, we know them: 
 13 Rebelling and denying the LORD, and drawing back from
following our God: speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving
and uttering from the heart words of falsehood. 
 14 And judgment is driven backward, and righteousness
standeth afar off; for truth hath stumbled in the broad place,
and uprightness cannot enter. 
 15 And truth is (found) missing, and he that removeth from
evil maketh himself a prey; and the LORD saw it, and it was
evil in his eyes that there was no judgment. 
 16 And he saw that there was no man, and was amazed that
there was none that interposed; therefore his own arm wrought
salvation for him, and his righteousness, it upheld him. 
 17 And he put on righteousness as a coat of mail, and a
helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on garments
of vengeance for clothing, and wrapped himself in jealousy as
a cloke. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 And a way of peace they know not, and there is no judgment
in their ways; for the paths which they travel are perverted, and
they know not peace. 
 9 Therefore did their judgment depart from them, and righte-
ousness shall not take hold of them ; when (they) waited for light,
darkness came upon them; they waited for a shining, and walked
in midnight gloom. 
 10 They shall grope like blind men for a wall, and as though
they had no eyes shall they grope; and they shall fall at noonday
as though at midnight, they shall groan as dying men: 
 11 As a bear and as a dove together shall they go: we
waited for judgment, and there is none; salvation is far removed
from us. 
 12 For manifold is our transgression before thee, and our
sins stand forth against us; for our transgressions are in us, and
our wrong doings we have learnt. 
 13 We were profane, and lied, and departed away from behind
our God; we talked unrighteously and were disobedient, we
conceived and rehearsed unrighteous words from our heart, 
 14 And removed (our) judgment behind us, and righteousness
standeth far off from us; for truth is consumed in their streets,
and they could not go through by straight ways. 
 15 And truth is removed, and they changed their thought
from understanding; and the Lord saw it, and it pleased him
not, that there was no judgment. 
 16 And he saw, and there was no man, and he perceived,
and there was none that would take hold; and he defended them
with his arm, and with his mercy he supported them. 
 17 And he put on righteousness as a breast-plate, and put on
an helmet of salvation upon his head, and clothed himself in
a cloke of vengeance, and his clothing 
 
 
 
 

 
 18 According to their deeds, accordingly will he requite, fury
to his adversaries, recompense to his enemies; to the isles he
will requite recompense. 
 19 And they shall fear the name of the LORD from the setting,
and his glory from the rising of the sun; for he shall come as
a pent-up stream, which the breath of the LORD driveth. 
 20 And a redeemer shall come to Zion, and to them that turn
from rebellion in Jacob, saith the LORD. 
 21 And as for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the
LORD; my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words that I have
put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out
of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's
seed, saith the LORD, from henceforth and for ever. 
 LX. 1 Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of
the LORD hath risen upon thee. 
 2 For behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and deep
gloom the peoples; but the LORD shall rise upon thee, and his
glory shall appear upon thee. 
 3 And nations shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness
of thy rising. 
 4 Lift up thine eyes round about, and see; they are all
gathered, they come to thee; thy sons shall come from far, and
thy daughters shall be carried on the side. 
 5 Then thou shalt see, and be bright, and thy heart shall
throb, and be enlarged; for the abundance of the sea shall turn
unto thee, the wealth of nations shall come to thee. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 18 As ready to requite, a requital of shame unto his
adversaries 
 19 And they from the setting (of the sun) shall fear the name
of the Lord, and they from the rising of the sun his glorious
name; for the anger of the Lord shall come like a rushing
river, it shall come with wrath. 
 20 And the deliverer shall come for Zion's sake, and shall turn
away ungodliness from Jacob. 
 21 And this is the covenant to them from me, saith the Lord;
my spirit which is upon thee, and the words which I have put
in thy mouth, shall not fail out of thy mouth, and out of the
mouth of thy seed: the Lord hath spoken it, henceforth and
for ever. 
 LX. 1 Shine, shine, Jerusalem; for thy light is come, and
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. 
 2 Behold, darkness and gloom covereth the earth upon (the)
nations; upon thee shall the Lord appear, and his glory shall
be seen upon thee: 
 3 And kings shall walk by thy light, and nations by thy
brightness. 
 4 Lift up thine eyes round about, and see thy children
i gathered together; behold, all thy sons are come from far, and
thy daughters shall be borne upon the shoulders. 
 5 Then thou shalt see, and fear, and be amazed in heart,
because there shall come over unto thee the wealth of the sea,
and of nations and peoples. And there shall come unto thee 
 
 
 
 

 
 6 A stream of camels shall cover thee, young camels of
Midian and Ephah; all of them shall come from Sheba, they
shall bear gold and incense, and they shall tell tidings of the
praises of the LORD. 
 7 All the ﬂocks of Kedar shall gather together unto thee, the
rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee; they shall go up
with acceptance on mine altar, and I will beautify the house of
my beauty. 
 8 Who are these that ﬂy as a cloud, and as doves to their
lattices? 
 9 Surely the isles are waiting for me, and the ships of Tarshish
ﬁrst, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with
them, unto the name of the LORD thy God, and to the Holy
One of Israel; for he hath beautified thee. 
 10 And aliens shall build thy walls, and their kings shall
minister unto thee; for in my wrath I smote thee, and in my
favour have I had mercy upon thee. 
 11 And thy gates shall be open continually; they shall not
be shut, day and night; to bring unto thee the wealth of nations,
and their kings led along; 
 12 For the nation and the kingdom that will not serve thee
shall perish; and the nations shall be utterly wasted. 
 13 The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the ﬁr tree,
the plane tree and the larch together, to beautify the place
of my sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet
honourable. 
 14 And the sons of them that afflicted thee shall go unto
thee, bowing down; and all they that scorned thee shall bow
themselves to the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee the
City of the LORD, Zion of the Holy One of Israel. 
 
 
 
 

 
 6 Herds of camels, and the camels of Midian and Ephah
shall cover thee; all (they) from Sheba shall come, bringing gold,
and they shall bring frankincense and precious stone, and shall
bring glad tidings of the salvation of the Lord. 
 7 And all the sheep of Kedar shall be gathered together, and
the rams of Nebaioth shall come for thee, and acceptable (offerings)
shall be brought unto mine altar, and my house of prayer
shall be glorifed 
 8 Who are these that ﬂy like clouds, and like doves with
their nestlings? 
 9 For me did the isles wait, and the ships of Tarshish ﬁrst
of all, to bring thy children from far, and their silver and their
gold with them, because of the name of the Lord, which is holy,
and because the Holy One of Israel is glorious. 
 10 And strangers shall build thy walls, and their kings shall
stand beside thee: for because of my wrath I smote thee, and
because of my mercy I loved thee. 
 11 And thy gates shall be opened continually, by day and by
night they shall not be shut, to bring unto thee the power of
nations, and kings led along. 
 12 For the nations and their kings, whosoever will not serve
thee shall die, and the nations shall be utterly desolated. 
 13 And the glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, with
the cypress and pine and cedar together, to glorify my holy
place. 
 14 And there shall come unto thee in fear the sons of them
that humbled thee and provoked thee; and thou shalt be called,
City of the Lord, Zion of the Holy One of Israel, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 15 Instead of thy being forsaken and hated, and none passing
through thee; I will set thee for an everlasting pride, a gladness
of generation upon generation. 
 16 And thou shalt suck the milk of nations, and shalt suck
the breast of kings; and thou shalt know that I the LORD am thy
Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob. 
 17 Instead of brass I will bring gold, and instead of iron
I will bring silver, and instead of wood brass, and instead of
stones iron; and I will make thy government peace, and thine
overseers righteousness. 
 18 Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor
destruction in thy borders; and thou shalt call thy walls Salvation,
and thy gates Praise. 
 19 The sun shall no more be thy light by day; and as for
shining, the moon shall not give light to thee; and the LORD
shall be to thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy beauty. 
 20 Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon
withdraw itself; for the LORD shall be to thee an everlasting
light, and the days of thy mourning shall be fulfilled 
 21 And thy people shall be all of them righteous; they shall
possess the land for ever; the shoot of my planting, the work
of my hands, that I may beautify myself. 
 22 The smallest shall become a thousand, and the least a strong
nation; I the LORD will hasten it in its time. 
 LXI. I The spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me; because
the LORD hath anointed me to bring glad tidings unto the
afflicted; hath sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim
liberty to captives, and opening of eyes to the bound: 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 15 Because thou hast been forsaken, and hated, and there was
none that came to help; and I will set thee for an everlasting
triumph, a joy for generations of generations. 
 16 And thou shalt suck the milk of nations, and shalt eat the
wealth of kings; and shalt learn that I the Lord am thy Saviour,
and the God of Israel that delivereth thee. 
 17 And instead of brass I will bring for thee gold, and instead
of iron I will bring thee silver, and instead of wood I will bring
thee brass, and instead of stones iron; and I will set thy rulers
in peace, and thine overseers in righteousness. 
 18 And no longer shall wrong doing be heard in thy land, nor
destruction, nor unhappiness in thy borders; but thy walls shall
be called Salvation, and thy gates carved work. 
 19 And the sun shall not be thy light by day, nor shall the
rising of the moon enlighten thy night; but the Lord shall be
to thee an everlasting light, and God thy glory. 
 20. For thy sun shall not go down, and the moon shall not
fail thee; for the Lord shall be to thee an everlasting light, and
the days of thy mourning shall be fulfilled 
 21 And thy people (shall be) all of it righteous, and they shall
possess the earth for ever; guarding the plant, the work of his
hands, for glory. 
 22 The smallest shall be for thousands, and the least one a
great nation: I the Lord will gather them together in due season. 
 LXI. 1 The spirit of the Lord is upon me; wherefore he
hath anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor; he hath
sent me to heal the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to
captives, and recovery of sight to the blind: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 To proclaim a year of acceptance for the LORD, and a day
of vengeance for our God; to comfort all mourners 
 3 To appoint for the mourners of Zion, to give unto them.
a garland instead of ashes, the Oil of gladness instead Of mourning,
a garment of praise instead of a faint spirit; and they shall
be called oaks of righteousness, the planting of the LORD, that
he may beautify himself. 
 4 And they shall build up ruins of old time; they shall raise
up desolations of the ﬁrst days; and they shall restore ruined
cities, desolations of generation upon generation. 
 5 And strangers shall stand and feed your ﬂocks, and aliens
shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers. 
 6 And ye shall be called the Priests of the LORD; men shall
say of you, The Ministers of our God; ye shall eat the wealth
of nations, and in their glory shall ye boast. 
 7 Instead of your shame, (ye shall have) twofold; and as for
confusion, they shall sing of their portion; therefore in their
land they shall possess twofold; everlasting joy shall be unto them 
 8 For I the LORD love judgment, I hate robbery with injustice;
and I will give them their earnings with truth, and I will
make an everlasting covenant with them. 
 9 And their seed shall be known among the nations, and their
offspring among the peoples; all that see them shall acknowledge
them, that they are a seed which the LORD hath blessed. 
 10 I will greatly rejoice in the LORD, my soul shall exult in
my God; for he hath put on me garments of salvation, he hath
wrapped me in a cloke of righteousness, as a bridegroom putteth
on priestly garland, and as a bride doth don her jewels. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 2 To call it an acceptable year of the Lord, and a day of
requital; to comfort all them that mourn; 
 3 That there be given to the mourners of Zion glory instead
of ashes, the anointing of joy to the mourners, a robe of glory
instead of a spirit of despair; and they shall be called generations
of righteousness, a plant of the Lord for glory. 
 4 And they shall build everlasting desolations, they shall set
up what were before utterly desolate, and they shall renew desolate
cities, that had been desolate for generations. 
 5 And strangers shall come, feeding thy sheep, and aliens for
plowmen and vinedressers. 
 6 But ye shall be called priests of the Lord, and ministers of
God; ye shall eat up the might of nations, and in their wealth
shall ye be marvelled at. 
 7 So shall they inherit the earth a second time, and everlasting
joy (shall be) upon their head. 
 8 For I am the Lord, that love righteousness, and hate
robberies (proceeding) from injustice: and I will give to the
righteous their toil, and I will make an everlasting covenant
with them. 
 9 And their seed shall become known among the nations, and
their offspring; every one that seeth them shall observe them,
that these are a seed blessed by God. 
 10 And with joy shall they rejoice unto the Lord. Let my
soul triumph because of the Lord; for he hath clothed me with
a cloke of salvation and a robe of joy, he hath put a garland
on (my head) as on a bridegroom, and hath adorned me with
ornaments as a bride. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 For as the earth which putteth forth her sprout, and as
a garden which causeth its plants to sprout, so the Lord GOD
will cause righteousness and praise to sprout forth before all
the nations. 
 LXII. I For Zion's sake I will not hold my peace, and
for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until her righteousness go
forth as a shining, and her salvation as a torch that burneth. 
 2 And nations shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy
glory; and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth
of the LORD shall pronounce. 
 3 And thou shalt be a crown of beauty in the hand of the
LORD, and a diadem of kingship in the open hand of thy God. 
 4 Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy
land be any more termed Desolation; for thou shalt be called
My delight in her, and thy land Married: for the LORD delighteth
in thee, and thy land shall be married. 
 5 For (as) a young man marrieth a virgin, thy sons shall marry
thee; and with the rejoicing of a bridegroom over a bride, thy
God shall rejoice over thee. 
 6 Ι have set watchmen upon thy walls, Jerusalem; all the
day and all the night continually they shall not hold their peace.
Ye remembrancers of the LORD, no rest for you, 
 7 And give no rest to him, until he establish, and until he set
Jerusalem (as) a praise in the earth. 
 8 The LORD hath sworn by his right hand, and by the arm
of his strength, Surely I will no more give thy corn (as) food to
thine enemies; and aliens shall not drink thy new wine, at which
thou hast laboured 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 And like earth making her blossom to grow, and like
a garden its seeds; so will the Lord make righteousness and
triumph to rise up before all the nations. 
 LXII. I Because of Zion I will not be silent, and because
of Jerusalem I will not cease, until my righteousness go forth as
light, and my salvation shall burn as a torch. 
 2 And nations shall see thy righteousness, and kings thy
glory; and he shall call thee by thy new name, which the Lord
shall name. 
 3 And thou shalt be a crown of beauty in the hand of the
Lord, and a diadem of royalty in the hand of thy God. 
 4 And thou shalt no longer be called Forsaken, and thy land
shall not be any more called Desolate; for thy name shall be
called My delight, and thy land, Dwelling. 
 5 And as a young man joineth house with a virgin, so shall
thy sons found houses with thee; and it shall be, as a bridegroom
shall rejoice over a bride, so shall the Lord rejoice
over thee. 
 6 And upon thy walls, Jerusalem, have I set watchmen, all
the day and all the night, who shall not be silent for ever,
making mention of the Lord. 
 7 For ye have none (other) like; if he. establish, and make
Jerusalem an exultation upon the earth. 
 8 The Lord hath sworn by his glory and by the might of
I his arm, I will not any more give thy corn and thy meats to
thine enemies; and no longer shall stranger children drink thy
wine, for which thou didst labour. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 9 For they that have gathered it shall eat it, and praise the
LORD; and they that have stored it shall drink it in my holy
courts. 
 10 Pass through, pass through at the gates; clear ye the
people's way; cast up, cast up the highway; clear it of stones;
lift up a banner over the peoples. 
 11 Behold, the LORD hath caused it to be heard unto the end
of the earth, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation
cometh; behold, his hire is with him, and his recompence
before him. 
 12 And they shall call them The holy people, the redeemed
of the LORD; and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not
forsaken. 
 LXIII. 1 Who is this that cometh from Edom, with bright
red garments from Bozrah? this, that is glorious in his raiment,
swaying in the mightiness of his strength? I, that speak in
righteousness, mighty to save. 
 2 Wherefore is there red upon thy raiment, and thy garments
like one that treadeth in a winepress? 
 3 Ι have trodden the wine trough alone, and of the peoples
there was not a man with me; and I trode them in mine anger,
and trampled them in my fury; and their life blood was sprinkled
on my garments, and I have stained all my raiment. 
 4 For a day of vengeance is in my heart, and the year of my
redeemed ones is come. 
 
 
 

 
 9 But they that gather them together shall eat them, and
praise the Lord; and they that gather them together shall drink
them in thy holy courts. 
 10 Go ye through my gates, and make a way for my people;
and cast away the stones out of the way, lift up a signal to the
nations 
 11 For behold, the Lord maketh it to be heard unto the end
of the earth; Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy
Saviour cometh to thee, having his own reward, and (his) work
before his face. 
 12 And he shall call it an holy people, ransomed by the Lord
while thou shalt be called, A city sought after, and, Not forsaken. 
 LXIII. 1 Who is this that approacheth from Edom, a red-
ness of garments from Bozrah? so beauteous in his apparel,
in violence with might? I discourse righteousness, and judgment
of salvation 
 2 Wherefore are thy garments red, and thy raiment as from
a trodden winepress? 
 3 (I am) full with the trodden (press); and of the nations
there is no man with me; and I trode them down in wrath,
and ground them, down as the earth, and brought down their
blood to the earth. 
 4 For a day of recompense is come upon them, and a year
of ransom is here. 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 And I looked, and there was none that helped; and I was
amazed, and there was none that supported; and mine own arm
wrought salvation for me, and my fury, it supported me. 
 6 Ahd I trampled the people in mine anger, and made them
drunk in my fury, and brought down their life blood to the earth. 
 7 I will recall the lovingkindnesses of the LORD, the praises
of the LORD, according to all that the LORD hath recompensed
to us, and the abundance of good toward the house of Israel
which he hath recompensed to them, according to his mercies,
and according to the abundance of his lovingkindnesses. 
 8 And he said, Only they are my people, sons that will not
deal falsely; and he became their Saviour. 
 9 In all their distress he was distressed, and the angel of his
Face saved them; in his love and in his forbearance he re
deemed them; and be lifted them up, and carried them all the
days of old. 
 10 And they rebelled and grieved his holy Spirit; and he
turned to be their enemy, and himself fought against them. 
 11 And he remembered the days of old, Moses, his people;
Where is he that brought them up out of the sea, with the
shepherd of his ﬂock? Where is he that put his holy Spirit
within him? 
 12 That caused his glorious arm to go at the right hand of
Moses, dividing the waters before them, to make himself an
everlasting name? 
 13 That caused them to go through the deeps, like a horse
in the wilderness, without stumbling? 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 And I looked on them, and (there was) no helper; and
I perceived, and no one took hold, and my arm rescued them,
and my wrath pressed on. 
 6 And I trampled them down with my anger, and brought
down their blood to the earth. 
 7 I called to mind the mercy of the Lord, the excellences
of the Lord in all things which the Lord recompenseth to us.
The Lord is an upright judge to the house of Israel, he bringeth
it upon us according to his mercy and according to the abundance
of his righteousness. 
 8 And he said, Are they not my people? children, and they
will not set at nought; and he was their salvation 
 9 Out of all affliction. It was no messengers, nor angel, but
the Lord himself that saved them, because he loved them, and
spared them; he it was that ransomed them, and took them up,
and uplifted them all the days of old. 
 10 But they disobeyed, and provoked the holy Spirit; and he
was turned to enmity against them, himself fought against them. 
 11 And he remembered the days of old: he that brought
up from the land the shepherd of the sheep. Where is he that
put his holy Spirit within them? 
 12 He that led Moses with his right hand? the arm of his
’ glory? he overcame the water before his face, to make himself
an everlasting name. 
 13 And he led them through the deep, like a horse through
the wilderness, and they wearied not, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 14 As a beast goeth down ’the valley, the Spirit of the
LORD brought him to rest; so didst thou lead thy people, to
make thyself a name of beauty. 
 15 Look from heaven, and see from the habitation of thy
holiness and thy beauty: where is thy jealousy, and thy mighty
acts? the sounding of thy bowels and thy mercies are restrained
towards me. 
 16 For thou art our father; for Abraham knoweth us not,
Israel doth not recognize us: thy name is Our Redeemer from
of old. 
 17 Why dost thou make us stray, O LORD, from thy ways,
and harden our heart from fearing thee? Return, for thy servants'
sake, the tribes of thine inheritance. 
 18 Thy holy people have possessed for a little while; our
adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary. 
 19 We are become as they over whom thou never barest
rule, upon whom thy name was not called. 
 LXIV. 1 O that thou hadst rent the heavens, that thou
hadst come down, that the mountains had quaked at thy
Presence! 
 2 As when kindleth brushwood, (as) ﬁre maketh water
boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, (that) nations
should tremble at thy presence, 
 3 While thou didst terrible things (which) we hoped not for;
that thou hadst come down, the mountains had quaked at thy
presence! 
 4 And from old they have not heard, have not perceived by
the ear, eye hath not seen a God beside thee, who will work for
him that waiteth for him. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 14 And as beasts through a plain; and a spirit dame down
from the Lord, and guided them; so didst thou lead thy people,
to make thyself a name of glory. 
 15 Turn thou from heaven, and see from thy holy house, and
(thy) glory: where is thy jealousy and thy might? where is the
abundance of thy mercy and thy pitifulness, that thou didst
bear with us? 
 16 Thou art our father; for Abraham knew us not, and Israel
recognized us not ; but thou, Lord, art our father; deliver us, thy
name is among us from the beginning. 
 17 Why didst thou make us to wander, Lord, from thy way?
didst harden our hearts, that we should not fear thee? turn
unto us, for the sake of thy bondmen, for the sake of the
tribes of thine inheritance, 
 18 That we may inherit a little of thy holy mountain: our
adversaries trode down thy sanctuary. 
 19 We are become as at the beginning, when thou didst not
rule over us, neither was thy name called upon us. 
 LXIV. r If thou openest the heaven, trembling shall seize
the mountains before thee, and they shall melt, 
 2 As wax melteth from before the ﬁre; and ﬁre shall burn
up thine enemies, and the name of the Lord shall be manifest
among thine enemies; from before thy face shall nations be
confounded, 
 3 When thou doest thy glorious deeds; trembling shall seize
the mountains before thee. 
 4 From everlasting have we not heard, nor have our eyes seen
any God except thee> and thy works which thou wilt do
them that wait for mercy. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness
in thy ways they will remember thee; behold, thou wast wroth,
and we sinned; in them (have we been) long time, and shall we
be saved? 
 6 And we are all become as one unclean, and all our
righteousnesses as a polluted garment; and we are all withered
as the leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, will take us away. 
 7 And there is none that calleth upon thy name, that rouseth
himself to hold fast by thee: for thou hast hid thy face from us,
and melted us by the hand of our iniquities. 
 8 And now, LORD, thou art our father; we are the clay, and
thou our potter; and we all are the work of thy hand. 
 9 Be not wroth, O LORD, to the uttermost, and remember not
iniquity for ever; behold, look, we beseech thee, we are all of
us thy people. 
 10 Thy holy cities are become wilderness, Zion is become
a wildemess, Jerusalem a desolation. 
 11 Our house of holiness and beauty, (in) which our fathers
praised thee, is burned up with ﬁre, and all our desirable things
are laid waste. 
 12 Wilt thou, for all this, refrain thyself, O LORD? wilt thou
hold thy peace, and affict us to the uttermost ? 
 LXV. 1 I was to be inquired of by them that asked not,
have let myself be found by them that sought me not; I said,
Here am I, Here am I, unto a nation that was not called by
my name. 
 2 I have spread out my hands all the day unto a refractory
people, which walk in a way which is not good, after their own
thoughts. 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 For he will meet them that do righteousness, and they shall
remember thy ways. Behold, thou wast wroth, and We sinned:
therefore we strayed, 
 6 And we all became as unclean, all our righteousness as
ﬁlthy rags; and we fell away like leaves because of our transgressions;
so shall a wind bear us away. 
 7 And there is none that calleth on thy name, or remembereth
to lay hold upon thee; for thou didst turn thy face away from us,
and didst deliver us over because of our transgressions. 
 8 And now, Lord, thou art our father; and we are clay,
all (are) the works of thy hands. 
 9 Be not wroth with us exceedingly, and remember not all
our sins betimes; and now look upon us, for we are all thy
people. 
 10 Thy city of the Holy One, Zion, is become desert;
Jerusalem is become as a desert: turned to a curse
II Is the house, our holy place: and the glory which our
I fathers blessed is burnt with ﬁre, and all (our) glorious things
are fallen together. 
 12 And for all this thou didst refrain, O Lord, and heldest
thy peace, and didst humble us exceedingly. 
 LXV. 1 I became manifest to them that sought me not;
I was found of them that inquired not of me; I said, Behold
(here) am I, to the nation which called not my name. 
 2 I spread forth my hands all the day, to a disobedient and
gainsaying people; to them which walked not by a way which
- was true, but after their own sins. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 The people that irritate me continually to my face; which
sacrifice in the gardens, and burn incense upon the bricks: 
 4 Which sit in the graves, and lodge in guarded places, which
eat swine's ﬂesh, and broth of abominations is in their vessels: 
 5 Which say, Keep to thyself, come not near to me; for I am
holy to thee. These are a smoke in my nose, a ﬁre that burneth
all the day. 
 6 Behold, it is written before me: I will not hold my peace,
unless I requite, and I will requite into their bosom, 
 7 Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together,
saith the LORD; which burned incense on the mountains, and
reproached me upon the hills: and I will measure their recompense
ﬁrst into their bosom. 
 8 Thus saith the LORD, As when the new wine is found in
the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it;
so will I do for my servants’ sake, not to destroy the whole. 
 9 And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of
Judah a possessor of my mountains; and my chosen ones shall
possess it, and my servants shall (go to) dwell there. 
 10 And Sharon shall become a home for ﬂocks, and the valley
of Achor a resting place for oxen, for my people that have
inquired of me. 
 11 And as for you, that forsake the LORD, that forget my
holy mountain, that set in order a table for Fortune, that ﬁll
up a mingled draught for Destiny: 
 
 
 
 

 
 3 This people is that which provoketh me continually to my
face; it is they that sacrifice in the gardens, and burn incense
upon the bricks to the demons that shall not be: 
 4 And they lie down in the monuments and in the caves for
the sake of dreams; they that eat swine's ﬂesh and broth of
sacrifies; all their vessels are ﬁled. 
 5 That say, Hence away from me, draw not near to me, for
I am clean: these are a smoke of my wrath, a ﬁre burneththerein
every day. 
 6 Behold, it is written before me, I will not be silent, until
I render into their bosom 
 7 Their iniquities, and (the iniquities) of their fathers, saith
the Lord; who burned incense upon the mountains, and reproached
me upon the hills; I will render their works into their
own bosom. 
 8 Thus saith the Lord: Like as the grape shall be found
amid the cluster, and they shall say, Hurt it not: for a blessing
of the Lord is in it: so will I do for the sake of him that serveth
me, for his sake will I not destroy (them) all. 
 9 And I will bring forth the seed that cometh from Jacob,
and from Judah, and it shall inherit my holy mountain, and my
chosen shall inherit it, and my bondmen shall dwell there. 
 10 And there shall be in the forest folds of ﬂocks, and the
valley of Achor shall be for a resting place for herds, for my
’ peOple who sought me. 
 11 But ye are they that forsook me, and that forget my holy
mountain; and prepare a table for the demon, and ﬁll a mingled
drink to Fortune. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 12 I will (even) destine you for the sword, and ye shall all
crouch down to the slaughter; because I called, and ye did not
answer; I spake, and ye did not hear; but did evil before mine
eyes, and chose that in which I took not pleasure. 
 13 Therefore, thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, my servants
shall eat, and ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall
drink, and ye shall be thirsty; behold, my servants shall rejoice,
and ye shall be ashamed: 
 14 Behold, my servants shall sing for happiness of heart, and
ye shall cry out for pain of heart, and shall howl for breaking
of spirit. 
 15 And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen
and the Lord GOD shall slay thee, and call his servants by
another name; 
 16 So that he who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless
himself by the God of truth; and he that sweareth in the
earth shall swear by the God of truth; because the ﬁrst distresses
are forgotten, and because they are hid from mine eyes. 
 17 For behold, I create new heavens and a new earth; and
the ﬁrst things shall not be remembered, nor come up into
the heart. 
 18 But rejoice ye and exult for ever at that which I create;
for behold, I create Jerusalem an exultation, and her people
a joy. 
 19 And I Will exult in Jerusalem, and rejoice in my people,
and the voice of weeping shall no more be heard in her, nor
the voice of crying out. 
 20 There shall be no more from thence an infant of days, or
an old man, that shall not fulfil his days: for the youth a
hundred years old shall die, and the sinner a hundred years
old shall be accursed 
 21 And they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they
shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them. 
 
 
 

 
 12 I will deliver you up to a sword, ye shall all fall by
slaughter: for I called you, and ye hearkened not; I spake, and
ye heard amiss; and did that which was evil before me, and
chose that which I desired not. 
 13 Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, they that serve me
shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; behold,. they that serve me
shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold, they that serve me
shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed. 
 14 Behold, they that serve me shall exult in joyfulness, but ye
shall cry out for weariness of your heart, and shall wail because
of the breaking of spirit. 
 15 For ye shall leave your name for a loathing for my chosen,
but you shall the Lord destroy. But they that serve him shall
be called by a new name, 
 16 Which shall be blessed upon the earth; for they shall bless
the true God, and they that swear upon the earth shall swear
by the true God. For they shall forget the ﬁrst affliction, and
it shall not come up into their heart. 
 17 For the heaven shall be new, and the earth new, and they
shall not remember the former things, nor shall they come into
their heart. 
 18 But they shall ﬁnd joy and exultation in her; behold,
I make Jerusalem an exultation, and my people a joy. 
 19 And I will exult in Jerusalem and rejoice in my people:
and no longer Shall there be heard in her the voice of weeping
and the voice of crying, 
 20 Nor shall there be there one untimely, nor an old man who
shall not fulfil his time: for the young shall be a hundred years
old, but he that dieth a sinner shall be a hundred years old, and
is accursed. 
 21 And they shall build houses, and themselves shall inhabit
them; and shall plant vineyards, and themselves shall eat the
fruits of them 
 
 
 
 

 
 22 They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not
plant, and another eat; for as the days of the tree are the days
of my people, and my chosen shall wear out the works of
their hands. 
 23 They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for terror;
for they are the seed of the blessed of the LORD, and their
offspring (shall be) with them. 
 24 And it shall be, before they shall call, I will answer; still
shall they be speaking, and I will hear. 
 25 The wolf and the lamb shall graze together, and the lion
shall eat straw like the ox; and (as. for) the serpent, dust his
food. They shall not do evil nor deal corruptly in all my holy
mountain, saith the LORD. 
 LXVI. I Thus saith the LORD, The heavens are my throne,
and the earth the footstool of my feet; where is this house ye
will build unto me? and where is this place of my rest? 
 2 And all these things hath my hand made, and all these
things came to be, saith the LORD; and to this one will I look,
to him who is afflicted and contrite in spirit, and trembleth at
my word. 
 3 He that slaughtereth the ox, slayeth a man; he that
sacrificeth the sheep, breaketh a ’s neck; he that offereth
a meal offering, sweene's blood: he that maketh a memorial of
incense, blesseth iniquity. Also they have chosen their own
ways, and their soul taketh pleasure in their abominations. 
 4 Also I will choose their mockeries, and will bring their fears
upon them; because I called, and there was none that answered;
I spake, and there was none that heard; and they did evil before
mine eyes, and chose that in which I took not pleasure. 
 
 

 
 22 And they shall. not build, and others inhabit; and they
shall not plant, and others eat. For according to the days of
the tree of life are the days of my people; the works of their
labours shall they make to grow old. 
 23 And my chosen ones shall not labour in vain, nor bring
forth children for a curse; for it is a seed blessed by God, and
their offspring shall be with them. 
 24 And it shall be, before they cry out, I will hearken to
them; while they are yet speaking, I will say, What is it? 
 25 Then shall wolves and lambs feed together, and a lion
shall eat chaff as an ox, and a serpent shall eat the earth as
bread: they shall not do wrong nor hurt upon my holy mountain,
saith the Lord. 
 LXVI. 1 Thus saith-the Lord, The heaven is my throne,
and the earth the footstool of my feet; what kind of house will
’ye build for me? or of what kind is the place of my rest ? 
 2 For all these things hath my hand made; and all these
things are mine, saith the Lord; and unto whom shall I look, save
to him that is humble, and quiet, and trembleth at my words? 
 3 But the transgressor, who sacrificeth to me a bullock, is as
one that slayeth a dog, and he that offereth ﬁne ﬂour as though
it were swine's blood; he that giveth frankincense for a memorial,
as a blasphemer; and they chose their own ways, and
their abominations, which their soul desired. 
 4 And I will choose their mockeries, and requite unto them
their sins: for I called them, and they hearkened not unto me;
I spake, and they heard not: and they did that which was wicked
before me, and chose out things which I willed not. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 Hear the word of the LORD, ye that tremble at his word;
your brethren say, that hate you, that drive you away for my
name's sake, Let the LORD show himself glorious, and we shall
see your joy; and they shall be ashamed. 
 6 A voice of tumult from the city, a voice from the temple,
a voice of the LORD rendering retribution to his enemies. 
 7 Before she travailed, she brought forth; before pain came to
her, she was delivered of a man child. 
 8 Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things?
Shall a land be travailed with in one day? shall a nation be born
at once? for Zion travailed, she also brought forth her sons. 
 9 Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth?
saith the LORD; shall I, that cause to bring forth, shut up (the
womb)? saith thy God. 
 10 Be ye glad with Jerusalem, and exult in her, all ye that love
her: rejoice with her, all that mourn with her. 
 11 That ye may suck, and be satisfied from the breast of her
consolations: that ye may milk out, and delight yourselves from
the fulness of her glory. 
 12 For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I extend to her peace
like a river, and the glory of nations like an ﬂowing stream:
and ye shall suck; ye shall be borne upon the side, be
fondled upon the knees. 
 13 As a man whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort
you: and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. 
 14 And ye shall see this, and your heart shall rejoice, and your
bones shall shoot up like the young grass; and the hand of the
LORD shall make itself known toward his servants, and he shall
be indignant toward his enemies. 
 
 
 
 

 
 5 Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word;
speak, our brethren, to them that hate us and hold (us) in
abomination, that the name of the Lord may be glorified, and
may be seen in their joy; and they shall be ashamed. 
 6 A voice of crying from the city, a voice from the temple,
a voice of the Lord requiting a requital to them that resist him. 
 7 Before the travailing woman brought forth, before the pain
of her pangs came, she escaped, and bare a man-child. 
 8 Who (hath) heard such a thing, and who hath seen it so?
did the earth travail in one day, was a nation ever born at once?
for Zion travailed, and she brought forth her children. 
 9 But it was I that gave thee this expectation, and thou
remerriberedst me not, saith the Lord: behold, is it not I that
make the fruitful and the barren? saith thy God. 
 10 Rejoice, O Jerusalem, and keep solemn assembly, all ye
that dwell in her; rejoice with joy, all ye that mourn over her. 
 11 That ye may suck, and be ﬁlled from the breast of her
consolation; that ye may suck out, and take delight from the
entering in of her glory. 
 12 For thus saith the Lord: Behold, I do incline toward them
like a river of peace, and like a torrent overflowing the glory of
nations: their children shall be borne upon the shoulders, and on
the knees shall they be comforted, 
 13 As whomsoever a mother shall comfort; for so will I also
comfort you, and in Jerusalem shall ye be comforted. 
 14 And your heart shall see and rejoice, and your bones shall
grow up as herbage: and the hand of the Lord shall be made
known to them that worship him, and he shall threaten the
disobedient. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 15 For behold, the LORD shall come in ﬁre, and his chariots
like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke
with ﬂames of ﬁre. 
 16 For with ﬁre will the LORD enter into judgment, and
with his sword with all ﬂesh; and the smitten of the LORD
shall be many. 
 17 They that hallow themselves, and purify themselves for
the gardens behind one in the midst, eating swine's ﬂesh, and
the abomination, and the mouse, shall come to an end together,
saith the LORD. 
 18 And I . . . . . . their works and their thoughts: it cometh,
to gather all nations and tongues: and they shall come, and see
my glory. 
 19 And I will set a sign among them, and I will send the
escaped of them unto the nations, Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that
draw the bow, Tubal and Javan, the isles afar off, that have not
heard my message, neither have seen my glory; and they shall
tell my glory among the nations. 
 20 And they shall bring all your brethren out of all nations,
a (meal) offering unto the LORD, upon horses, and in chariots,
and in litters, and upon mules, and upon dromedaries, to my
holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the LORD, as the children of
Israel bring the (meal) offering in a clean vessel to the house
of the LORD. 
 21 And also of them will I take for the priests, for the
Levites, saith the LORD. 
 22 For as the. new heavens and the new earth, which I make,
stand before me, saith the LORD, so shall your seed and your
name stand. 
 
 
 
 

 
 15 For behold, the Lord shall come as a ﬁre, and his chariots
as a whirlwind, to render vengeance in wrath, and utter rejection
in a ﬂame of ﬁre. 
 16 For by the ﬁre of the Lord shall all the earth be judged,
and all ﬂesh by his sword: many shall be wounded by the Lord. 
 17 They that hallow and purify themselves for the gardens,
and eat swine's ﬂesh, and their abominations, and the mouse, in
the forecourts, shall be consumed together, saith the Lord. 
 18 And I (know) their works, and their reasoning; I am
coming to gather together all the nations and the tongues, and
they shall come, and shall see my glory. 
 19 And I will leave signs upon them, and I will send forth
from them those that are saved to the nations, to Tarshish, and
Phut, and Lud, and Meshech, and Tubal, and to Greece, and
to the isles afar off; men who have not heard my name,
I neither have seen my glory: and they shall declare my glory
among the nations. 
 20 And they shall bring your brethren out of all the nations
for a gift to the LORD, with horses and chariots, in mule-chariots
with awnings, into the holy city Jerusalem, saith the Lord, that
the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices to me with
psalms, into the house of the Lord. 
 21 And from them will I take me priests and Levites, saith
the Lord. 
 22 For like as the heaven (is) new, and the earth (is) new,
’which I make remaineth before me, saith the Lord: so
shall your seed and your name stand. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 23 And it shall be, from new moon to new moon, and from
sabbath to sabbath, shall all ﬂesh come to worship before me,
saith the LORD. 
 24 And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of
the men that have rebelled against me: for their worm shall
not die, and their ﬁre shall not be quenched; and they shall
be a horror unto all ﬂesh. 

 
 23 And it shall be, for month after month, and sabbath after
sabbath, all ﬂesh shall come before me to worship at Jerusalem,
saith the Lord. 
 24 And they shall go forth, and shall see the limbs of the
men ’that have transgressed against me: for their worm doth
not cease, and their ﬁre shall not be quenched: and they shall
be for a spectacle to all ﬂesh.